[Albert Embankment]
(On the south side of the River Thames in London, across from Thorney Island and the Houses of Parliament, a crowd is gathered as Big Ben chimes three o'clock and a dinosaur roars at it.)
POLICEMAN: Come on, out of the way. Move yourself, please. Coming through. That's it. Excuse me, sir.
(A trio are escorted through the crowd to a police Inspector.)
GREGSON: Madame Vastra, thank God. I'll wager you've not seen anything like this before.
VASTRA: Well, not since I was a little girl.
JENNY: Big fella, isn't he?
VASTRA: Dinosaurs were mostly this size. I do believe it's a she.
JENNY: No, they weren't, I've seen fossils.
VASTRA: I was there.
GREGSON: Well, that's all well and good, but what's this dinosaur fellow doing in the Thames?
(The Tyrannosaurus Rex is pacing and bellowing in the river, and still standing taller than the Elizabeth Tower, then known simply as the Clock Tower because of the four clock faces and Big Ben housed within it. That makes the creature well over 315 feet or 96 metres tall. Naturally, the crowd screams.)
VASTRA: It must have time travelled. Jenny?
(Jenny holds up a hand-scanner, which is part of her glove.)
GREGSON: Time travelled?
(The dinosaur tries to cough something up.)
JENNY: Is it choking?
VASTRA: There seems to be something lodged in its throat.
JENNY: How could it time travel?
VASTRA: I don't know. Perhaps it was something it ate.
(The dinosaur manages to dislodge the obstruction in its throat, and a small blue box with a light on top flies out of its mouth to land right way up on the riverbank below the crowd.)
GREGSON: Stand back. Stand back, stand back.
(He pushes his way forward to a better vantage point.)
GREGSON: Well, it's just laid an egg.
VASTRA; It's dropped a blue box marked Police out of its mouth. Your grasp of biology, it troubles me.
JENNY: It's the Tardis.
VASTRA: It would seem so.
JENNY: We'll take care of this, Inspector.
GREGSON: But what if that thing goes on the rampage?
(Vastra takes balls with three legs out of a sack.)
VASTRA: Place these lanterns on the shoreline and bridges, encircling the creature at twenty foot intervals.
GREGSON: What will they do?
VASTRA: They will emit a signal that will incline it to remain within their circumference. Jenny, Strax. With me.
(They go down the stone stairs to the river bank.)
JENNY: So it's him, then, the Doctor?
VASTRA: A giant dinosaur from the distant past has just vomited a blue box from outer space.

[River bank]

VASTRA: This is not a day for jumping to conclusions. Strax, if you wouldn't mind?
(Strax knocks on the Tardis door. It is smeared with sputum from its previous location.)
STRAX: Hello? Exit the box, and surrender to the glory of the Sontaran empire.
(A tall grey-haired man opens the door and looks out. Smoke comes out as well.)
DOCTOR: Shush.
(He shuts the door again.)
STRAX: Doctor?
(The door opens again.)
DOCTOR: I was being chased by a giant dinosaur, but I think I managed to give it the slip.
(The door shuts again, then is opened slowly.)
DOCTOR: Sleepy?
STRAX: Sir?
DOCTOR: Bashful? Sneezy? Dopey? Grumpy.
(Then he sees the two women and walks towards them.)
DOCTOR: Oh, you two. The green one and the not-green one. Or it could be the other way round, I mustn't prejudge.
(Clara appears, very dishevelled. She is wearing a black fitted jacket with an 'outline of bow tie' motif and tartan mini-kilt.)
DOCTOR: Oh, you remember, er. Thingy. The, er, the not-me one. The asking questions one. Names not my area.
CLARA: Clara.
DOCTOR: Well, it might be Clara. Might not be. It's a lottery.
CLARA: It is Clara.
DOCTOR: Well, I'm not ruling it out.
(The dinosaur bellows.)
DOCTOR: Oi, big man, shut it. Oh, you've got a dinosaur too. Big woman, sorry.
CLARA: Doctor, listen to me. You, you need to calm down.
DOCTOR: (to dinosaur) I'm not flirting, by the way.
CLARA: I think something's gone wrong.
DOCTOR: Wrong? What's gone wrong? Have you regenerated? (to Clara) I remember you. You're Handles. You used to be a little, a little robot head, and now you. You've really let yourself go.
(The dinosaur bellows again.)
DOCTOR: Reduce the frequency.
CLARA: I'm sorry?
DOCTOR: Your sonic lanterns, turn them down. You're giving her a headache.
JENNY: Giving who a headache?
DOCTOR: My lady friend. Just an expression, don't get any ideas.
STRAX: How do you know?
DOCTOR: Come on, Clara. You know that I speak dinosaur.
CLARA: He's not Clara. I'm Clara.
DOCTOR: Well, you're very similar heights. Maybe you should wear labels? Why, why are you all doing that? Why are you? You're all going dark and wobbly. Stop that.
CLARA: I don't think we are.
DOCTOR: Never mind. Everyone take five.
(The Doctor closes his eyes, sways, then falls over.)
CLARA: What do we do?
JENNY: I don't understand. Who is he? Where's the Doctor?
CLARA: Right here. That's him. That's the Doctor.
VASTRA: Well then, here we go again.

[Guest bedroom]

(Nightime, with a full moon. At Vastra's house, the Doctor is now wearing a full length night shirt. Clara and Jenny are listening at the door.)
DOCTOR [OC]: It's simply misunderstandable to me. I don't know what it is. Who invented this room?
(He opens the door and Clara and Jenny nearly fall inside.)
CLARA: Doctor, please, you have to lie down.
DOCTOR: It doesn't make sense. Look, it's only got a bed in it. Why is there only a bed in it?
CLARA: Because it's a bed room. It's for sleeping in.
DOCTOR: Okay, what do you do when you're awake?
JENNY: You leave the room.
DOCTOR: So you've got a whole room for not being awake in. But what's the point? You're just missing the room. And don't look in that mirror. It's absolutely furious.
CLARA: Doctor, please. You have to lie down. You keep passing out.
DOCTOR: Well, of course I keep passing out. There's all these beds. Why do you keep talking like that? What's gone wrong with your accent? Why
JENNY: Nothing's wrong with her accent.
DOCTOR: You sound the same. It's spreading. You all sound all English. Now you've all developed a fault.
VASTRA: (with a Scots accent) Doctor, I need your help with something.
DOCTOR: Finally, someone who can talk properly.
VASTRA: I'm having difficulty sleeping.
DOCTOR Oh? Oh, well, I wouldn't bother with that, I never bother with sleep, and I just do standy-up catnaps.
VASTRA: Oh really, how interesting. And when do you do those?
DOCTOR: Well, generally whenever anyone else starts talking. I like to skip ahead to my bits. It saves time.
(Vastra gently leads him to the bed and they sit down.)
VASTRA: Save me time, Doctor. Project an image of perfect sleep into the centre of my mind.
DOCTOR: What, do you want a psychic link with me? The size of my brain, it would be like dropping a piano on you.
VASTRA: Be gentle, then.
DOCTOR: I'll try. Brace yourself. Piano.
(They put their fingers to the others temple. Boing! Doctor falls back onto the bed, sound asleep.)
VASTRA: (English accent) I love monkeys. They're so funny.
JENNY: Oh, I see. So people are monkeys now, are they?
VASTRA: No, dear. People are apes. Men are monkeys.
(They tuck the Doctor up in bed.)
CLARA: So what now?
VASTRA: He needs rest.
CLARA: So what do we do? How do we fix him?
JENNY: Fix him?
CLARA: How do we change him back?
VASTRA: Jenny, I will be in my chamber. Would you be kind enough to fetch my veil?
JENNY: Why, are we expecting strangers?
VASTRA: It would seem there's already one here.
(Vastra leaves.)
CLARA: What have I done wrong?
(The sound of a sad dinosaur drifts into the room.)
JENNY: The dinosaur doesn't seem very happy.
CLARA: What's wrong with it?
JENNY: I dunno. The Doctor's the one that speaks dinosaur. Excuse me, ma'am. The wife doesn't like to be kept waiting.
CLARA: Where did he get that face? Why's it got lines on it? It's brand new. How can his hair be all grey? He only just got it.
JENNY: It's still him, ma'am. You saw him change.
CLARA: I know. I do. I, I know that.
JENNY: Good.
CLARA: It's just
JENNY: What?
CLARA: Nothing. If. If Vastra changed, if she was different, if she wasn't the person that you liked?
VASTRA: I don't like her, ma'am. I love her. And as to different? Well, she's a lizard.
(Clara goes to the window and hears the moaning dinosaur.)
DOCTOR: I am alone. The world which shook at my feet, and the trees and the sky, have gone. And I am alone now. Alone.
CLARA: Are you translating?
DOCTOR: The wind bites now, and the world is grey, and I am alone here. Can't see me. Doesn't see me. Can't see me.
CLARA: Who can't see it? I think all of London can see it.
STRAX: Boy? Madame Vastra is waiting.
CLARA: Okay. Whatever.
STRAX: I will convey you to her chamber. May I take your coat?
CLARA: Not wearing a coat.
STRAX: What's all that?
CLARA: Clothes.
STRAX: May I take your clothes?
CLARA: (sotto) Probably not.
STRAX: Are you wearing a hat?
CLARA: It's hair.
STRAX: No, I think it's a hat. Would you like me to check?

[Street]

(The lamplighter is at work, and middle-aged couple are walking together.)
ALF: It's not real, of course.
ELSIE: What is it, then?
ALF: The government.
ELSIE: The government?
ALF: Yeah, up to their usual tricks.
ELSIE: It's a dinosaur, Alf. A real dinosaur.
ALF: I wouldn't put it past them.
ELSIE: You don't half talk a lot of rubbish, Alfie. See you don't stay out too late now.
ALF: You know me.
ELSIE: Yes. I do.
(She gives him a peck on the cheek and leaves. The lamplighter illuminates a man standing in the shadows. He turns with a click.)
ALF: It's the neck. That's what's wrong with it. Just don't look realistic.
HALF-FACE MAN: You have good eyes.
ALF: Oh, I do, as it happens. Very good eyes. They're my greatest gift.
HALF-FACE MAN: I accept.
(The man takes a sharp two pronged fork from a case.)
ALF: What's that for?
HALF-FACE MAN: Your gift. I have bad eyes.
(The man turns towards Alf, to reveal that one eye and half his face is mechanical. Naturally, Alf screams.)

[Vastra's chamber]

(A conservatory. Vastra is sitting in her peacock chair. A fountain is playing.)
VASTRA: And then?
CLARA: Why are you wearing your veil?
VASTRA: And then?
CLARA: And then we got swallowed by a big dinosaur. You probably noticed.
JENNY: How did it happen?
CLARA: I don't know. I don't know. We were crashing about everywhere. The Doctor was gone. The Tardis went haywire.
JENNY: He's not gone. He's upstairs.
CLARA: Okay, he changed.
VASTRA: He regenerated. Renewed himself.
CLARA: Renewed. Fine.
VASTRA: Such a cynical smile.
CLARA: I'm not smiling.
VASTRA: Not outwardly. But I'm accustomed to seeing through a veil. How have I amused you?
CLARA: You said renewed. He doesn't. He doesn't look renewed. He looks older.
VASTRA: You thought he was young?
CLARA: He looked young.
VASTRA: He looked like your dashing young gentleman friend. Your lover, even.
CLARA: Shut up.
VASTRA: But he is the Doctor. He has walked this universe for centuries untold, he has seen stars fall to dust. You might as well flirt with a mountain range.
CLARA: I did not flirt with him.
VASTRA: He flirted with you.
CLARA: How?
VASTRA: He looked young. Who do you think that was for?
CLARA: Me?
VASTRA: Everyone. I wear a veil as he wore a face for the same reason.
CLARA: What reason?
VASTRA: The oldest reason there is for anything. To be accepted.
(Up in the guest bedroom, the Doctor wakes and sniffs the air. He gets out of bed and crawls around on the carpet, sniffing. He goes to the radiator and finds a piece of chalk which he uses to make marks on it.)
VASTRA: Jenny and I are married. Yet for appearance's sake, we maintain a pretence, in public, that she is my maid.
JENNY: Doesn't exactly explain why I'm pouring tea in private.
VASTRA: Hush now.
JENNY: Good pretence, isn't it?
VASTRA: I wear a veil to keep from view what many are pleased to call my disfigurement. I do not wear it as a courtesy to such people, but as a judgment on the quality of their hearts.
CLARA: Are you judging me?
VASTRA: The Doctor regenerated in your presence. The young man disappeared, the veil lifted. He trusted you. Are you judging him?
CLARA: How dare you? How dare you?

[Guest bedroom]

(The Doctor is writing on the floorboards. He stands when he hears the dinosaur, then goes to the door and opens it.)
DOCTOR: Door. Boring. Not me.
(He goes to the window and opens it.)
DOCTOR: Me.

[Vastra's chamber]

CLARA: Marcus Aurelius, Roman emperor. Last of the five good 'uns. Stoic philosopher.
VASTRA: Superlative bass guitarist. The Doctor really knows how to put a band together.
CLARA: And the only pin-up I ever had on my wall when I was fifteen. The only one I ever had. I am not sure who you think you're talking to right now, Madam Vastra, but I have never had the slightest interest in pretty young men. And for the record, if there ever was anybody who could flirt with a mountain range, she's probably standing in front of you right now. Just because my pretty face has turned your head, do not assume that I am so easily distracted.
(Vastra is no longer wearing her veil. Jenny applauds.)
JENNY: Whoo. Whoo. Sorry.
VASTRA: Well, goodness me. The lake is ruffled at last. I often wondered what you'd be like when you lost your temper.
JENNY: Oi. Married.
VASTRA: The Doctor needs us, you more than anyone. He is lost in the ruin of himself, and we must bring him home.
CLARA: When did you stop wearing your veil?
VASTRA: When you stopped seeing it.

[Rooftops]

(The Doctor is making his way towards the river.)
DOCTOR: Oi. Oi. Oi, big, sexy woman. Oi. Sorry. Sorry, it's all my fault. My time machine got stuck in your throat. It happens. I brought you along by accident. That's mostly how I meet girls, but don't worry, I promise I will get you home. I swear. Whatever it takes, I will keep you safe. You will be at home again.
(The dinosaur suddenly bursts into flames. It roars in pain before collapsing.)
DOCTOR: Stop that. Who's doing that? No, don't do that.

[Vastra's chamber]

VASTRA: That came from the river.
JENNY: The dinosaur.
VASTRA: Strax! Bring the carriage, now!

[Street]

(The Doctor leaps from a roof into a tree. The upper bough breaks under the strain, dropping him down.)
DOCTOR: Argh. Argh. Oh.
(He finishes hanging upside down from the lowest branch by his knees. A hansom cab, or growler, trots into his view.)
DOCTOR: Halt. Sorry, I'm going to have to relieve you of your pet.
CABBIE: You're what?
DOCTOR: Shut up, I was talking to the horse.
(The Doctor somersaults on to the horse's back and uses his sonic screwdriver to sever the traces and reins.)
CABBIE: What are you doing?
DOCTOR: Forwards.
(He gallops off. Madam Vastra's carriage driven by Strax goes past the stranded cabbie.)
STRAX: Out of the way, human scum. Hi-yah. Jurassic emergency. Yah.
(The Doctor is cantering along the cobbles.)
DOCTOR: Left. No, no. Right, right, right, right. Sorry, it's my new hands. I can't tell them apart.

[Vastra's carriage]

JENNY: What do you think's happened?
VASTRA: I don't know, but I fear devilment.
CLARA: Should we not have told the Doctor?
JENNY: He's not ready to leave his bed.

[Street]

DOCTOR: Watch it on the corners, it's a bit slippery up here.

[Vastra's carriage]

VASTRA: Strax.
(Strax is urging on the horse.)
VASTRA: Come on, Strax.
(He cracks the whip.)
VASTRA: That's better.

[Westminster Bridge]

(The Doctor dismounts and stands on the parapet over the burning remains, muttering to himself.)
DOCTOR: (sotto) Sorry, sorry. I'm sorry, sorry, sorry.
(Strax brings the carriage to a halt behind him, and the ladies get out.)
STRAX: Whoa.
JENNY: The Doctor.
CLARA: What's he doing here?
(Vastra secures her carriage using the remote control in her hat.)
VASTRA: There is trouble. Where else would he be?
DOCTOR: She was scared. She was scared and alone. I brought her here and look what they did.
VASTRA: Who or what could have done this thing?
DOCTOR: No.
VASTRA: I'm sorry?
DOCTOR: No. That is not the question. That is not where we start.
STRAX: The question is how. The flesh itself has been combusted.
DOCTOR: No, no, shut up. What do you all have for brains, pudding? Look at you. Why can't I meet a decent species? Planet of the pudding brains.
CLARA: Doctor, I know you're upset, but you need to calm down and talk to us. What is the question?
DOCTOR: A dinosaur is burning in the heart of London. Nothing left but smoke and flame. The question is, have there been any similar murders?
VASTRA: Yes. Yes, by the Goddess, there have.
DOCTOR: Look at them all, gawking.
DOCTOR: Question two. If all the pudding brains are gawking, then what is he?
(One man is walking away calmly.)
VASTRA: He seems remarkably unmoved by the available spectacle.
CLARA: Do you think that is whoever
(There is a splash. The Doctor is no longer standing on the parapet.)
CLARA: What he's doing? He'll drown.
VASTRA: I very much doubt it.
CLARA: Why?
VASTRA: There has been a murder. The Doctor has taken up the case. If we are to see him again, we must do the same.

[Clara's bedroom]

(Next day. Clara pours water into a bowl on her washstand.)
STRAX [OC]: Come on, Earthling scum. Position it here. Easy now. That's it. Careful.
(She opens the window onto the courtyard. A cart has brought the Tardis from the river bank.)
STRAX: Don't get it scratched or you and all your bloodline will be obliterated from time and space.
FOOTMAN: Very good, sir.
(Clara leans out.)
CLARA: Strax!

[Courtyard]

STRAX: Ah! Morning, Miss Clara. You're awake at last.
CLARA: You got the Tardis, then?
STRAX: Military tactics. The Doctor is still missing, but he will always come looking for his box. By bringing it here, he will be lured from the dangers of London to this place of safety, and we will melt him with acid.
CLARA: Okay, that last part?
STRAX: And we will not melt him with acid. Old habits. The Times. Shall I send it up?
CLARA: Yeah, why not?
STRAX: Hah!
(He throws the rolled-up newspaper, hitting her squarely between the eyes and knocking her down.)

[Staircase]

(Clara is dressed and coiffured in the late Victorian style. She meets Jenny coming up the stairs.)
CLARA: Jenny.
JENNY: Ah, good morning, Clara.
CLARA: Morning. Er, so, what are we going to do? Are we looking for the Doctor?
JENNY: We've got the Paternoster Irregulars out in force. If anyone can find him, they can. Meanwhile, Madam Vastra is slightly occupied by the Conk-Singleton forgery case, and is having the Camberwell child poisoner for dinner.
CLARA: For dinner?
JENNY: After she's finished interrogating him. Probably best to stay out the larder. It'll get a bit noisy in there later.
CLARA: Oh.

[Kitchen]

(Strax is mopping the floor.)
STRAX: Ah, Miss Clara. You look better now you're up.
CLARA: Thank you, Strax.
STRAX: Oh, sorry. Trick of the light. You still look terrible. Can I get you anything?
CLARA: Er, no, thanks. Maybe just some water.
STRAX: Of course.
(He puts the mop bucket on the table.)
STRAX: Well, don't hold back. I've nearly finished anyway.
CLARA: Er.
STRAX: It's perfectly all right. I washed in it myself.
CLARA: All of a sudden, I'm not very thirsty.
STRAX: Really? Perhaps it is time, then.
(He takes out a monocle like device with three lenses, and shines a green light into her eye.)
STRAX: For your mandatory medical examination. Say ah.
CLARA: Ah.
STRAX: You didn't move your lips.
CLARA: You're looking at my eye.
STRAX: Oh. Oh yes, there we are. Easy mistake.
(He aims the light at her forehead.)
STRAX: Now that's interesting.
CLARA: What? What's interesting?
STRAX: Deflected narcissism. Traces of passive aggressive. And a lot of muscular young men doing sport.
CLARA: What are you looking at?
STRAX: Your subconscious. Is that sport? It could be sport.
(She flicks down the lens.)
CLARA: Well, stop looking.
STRAX: Moving onto the thorax, such as it is.
(The green light makes Clara's ribcage visible.)
STRAX: Ah, excellent. Enviable spleen. Well done. Twenty seven years old, with a projected lifespan of exactly
CLARA: Stop right there.
STRAX: Oh, you're going to do quite well. But watch out for fluid retention later. It's going to be spectacular. Well, put your clothes back on.
CLARA: They are on.
STRAX: Oh yes, so they are.
(She takes his scanner from him and puts it on the table.)
CLARA: Why are you doing this?
STRAX: If we are to serve together, I need you in peak physical prowess, eh?
(Strax punches Clara's arm.)
CLARA: Ow. Why would we be serving together? The Doctor's going to come back, isn't he?
STRAX: It is to be hoped.
CLARA: He's not just going to abandon me here.
STRAX: You must stop worrying about him, my boy. By now, he's almost certainly had his throat cut by the violent poor.

[Alleyway]

(Bermondsey, I'd say. Near the Clink and Southwark Cathedral. The Doctor, still in his now very dirty nightshirt, is rummaging in the rubbish. He is watched by a smelly tramp in a thick coat, who is holding a beer bottle. The Doctor finds a broken mirror. He turns at the sound of the tramp throwing away his bottle. For those who like trivia, the tramp is played by Elisabeth Sladen's widower.)
DOCTOR: Bitey. The air, it's bitey. It's wet, and bitey.
BARNEY: Oh, it's cold.
DOCTOR: That's right. It's cold. It's cold, I knew it was a thing. I need um, I need clothes. I need clothes, that's what I need. And a big, long scarf. No, no, move on from that. Looked stupid. Er, have you seen this face before?
BARNEY: No.
DOCTOR: Are you sure?
BARNEY: Sir, I have never seen that face.
DOCTOR: It's funny, because I'm sure that I have. You know, I never know where the faces come from. They just pop up. Zap. Faces like this one. Come on, look at it, have a look, come on, look, look, look.
(The Doctor pulls Barney over to look in the mirror on the ground.)
DOCTOR: Look, it's covered in lines. But I didn't do the frowning. Who frowned me this face? Do you ever look in the mirror and think I've seen that face before?
BARNEY: Yes.
DOCTOR: Really? When?
BARNEY: Well, every time I look in the mirror.
DOCTOR: Oh, yes, yes, yes. Fair enough. Good point. My face is fresh on, though.
BARNEY: Er
(Barney moves away from the nutter in the nightshirt.)
DOCTOR: Why this one? Why did I choose this face? It's like I'm trying to tell myself something. Like I'm trying to make a point. But what is so important that I can't just tell myself what I'm thinking?
BARNEY: Er
DOCTOR: I'm not just being rhetorical here. You can join in.
BARNEY: I don't like it.
DOCTOR: What?
BARNEY: Your face.
DOCTOR: Well, I don't like it either. Well, it's all right up until the eyebrows. Then it just goes haywire. Look at the eyebrows. These are attack eyebrows. You could take bottle tops off with these.
BARNEY: They are mighty eyebrows indeed, sir.
DOCTOR: They're cross. They're crosser than the rest of my face. They're independently cross. They probably want to secede from the rest of my face and set up their own independent state of eyebrows. That's Scot. I am Scottish. I've gone Scottish?
BARNEY: Oh yes, you are. You are definitely Scots, sir. I, I 'ear it in your voice.
DOCTOR: Oh no, that's good. Oh.
(He practices the long rolling Scottish 'oh' sound.)
DOCTOR: It's good I'm Scottish. I'm Scottish. I am Scottish. I can complain about things, I can really complain about things. Now, give me your coat.
BARNEY: No.
DOCTOR: I am cold.
BARNEY: I'm cold.
DOCTOR: I'm cold. There's no point in us both being cold. Give me your coat. Give me your coat. No, wait. Shut up, shut up. Shut up. I missed something. It was here, it was here. It was. What was it I saw? What did I see?
(He pick up an old newspaper.)
DOCTOR: This is what I saw. Spontaneous combustion.
(Fourth case of spontaneous combustion. The death of Margaret Roberts occurred on Friday, outside her home address in London, in what the police are describing as a curious case of spontaneous combustion. She was aged 68 years. Born in Scotland, Mrs Roberts etc, etc.)
BARNEY: What devilry is this, sir?
DOCTOR: I don't know, but I probably blame the English.

[Vastra's chamber]

(Vastra is working at a large wood backed panel on an easel while Jenny holds an awkward pose in her corset and a shawl.)
VASTRA: Hmm. Spontaneous combustion.
JENNY: Is that like love at first sight?
VASTRA: Hmm. A little. It is the theory that human beings can, with little or no inducement, simply explode.
JENNY: You don't need to flirt with me. We're already married.
VASTRA: It's scientific nonsense, of course.
JENNY: Marriage?
VASTRA: Hush. There have been nine reported incidents of people apparently exploding in the last month.
JENNY: And you think they weren't spontaneous.
VASTRA: I think whoever killed the dinosaur had at least nine previous victims. All of these perished in the same spectacular fashion.
(Vastra turns the easel to reveal newspaper cuttings, a map of London, and lines linking them up.)
JENNY: I thought you were painting me.
VASTRA: I was working.
JENNY: Well, why am I posing then?
VASTRA: Well, you brighten the room tremendously. Chin up a little.
JENNY: Oh, I don't understand why I'm doing this.
VASTRA: Art? Now, why destroy the victims so completely? It's difficult, it draws attention. What advantage is to be gained?
JENNY: Well, tell us, then.
VASTRA: Concealment, perhaps.
JENNY: Concealment?
VASTRA: It's a fanciful theory, but it fits the facts. By destroying the body so completely, you conceal what is missing from it.
JENNY: Missing from the body?
CLARA [OC]: Madame Vastra!
(A happy Clara bursts into the room.)
VASTRA: Clara, excellent. Pop your clothes on that chair there.
CLARA: Look.
(Clara shows Vastra the Times newspaper.)
VASTRA: Advertisements, yes. So many. It's a distressing modern trend.
CLARA: No, look. Look.
(One advert in the personal column says - Impossible Girl. Lunch on the other side?)
JENNY: Ma'am?
VASTRA: The game is afoot. We're going to need a lot of tea.
(Vastra rings the bell. Later, Strax is pouring it out.)
VASTRA: There appears to be nothing of significance in the rest of the newspaper. Not even in the agony column.
JENNY: We can't know it's from the Doctor.
CLARA: Of course it's from the Doctor. The Impossible Girl, that's what he calls me.
VASTRA: He says lunch, but not when or where?
JENNY: On the other side? The other side of London? Bit vague.
VASTRA: The other side of regeneration, perhaps, once he's recovered?
CLARA: So what am I supposed to do, guess where we're meeting?
VASTRA: Perhaps that's the point. Perhaps you're supposed to prove that you still know him. Think what that must mean for a man who barely knows himself.
CLARA: It doesn't makes sense. He doesn't do puzzles. He isn't complicated. Really doesn't have the attention span. So, keeping it dead simple. On the other side.
(She hold the page up to the light. There is another advert directly behind hers, so she turns it over to read it. Mancini's Family Restaurant, the Best Dinner in London.)

[Mancini's]

(Clara crosses the street and looks up at the building, which is just as depicted in the advert. She goes inside and sits by herself on a curved bench seat in a wall alcove, with a small round table in front of it. The restaurant has other customers, but is very quiet. She examines the advert again, then sniffs. Then she coughs as she fans the air with the paper. Her companion is wearing a noisome coat.)
DOCTOR: What's wrong?
CLARA: I don't know. Maybe the smell?
DOCTOR: I know. It's everywhere.
CLARA: Where did you get that coat?
DOCTOR: Er, ahem, I bought it.
CLARA: From where?
DOCTOR: Er, a shop?
CLARA: No.
DOCTOR: Might have been a tramp.
CLARA: You don't have any money.
DOCTOR: Er, I had a watch.
CLARA: No. That watch was beautiful.
DOCTOR: It was my favourite.
CLARA: You swapped your favourite watch for that coat. That's maybe not a good deal.
DOCTOR: Well, I was in a hurry. There was a terrible smell.
CLARA: Okay.
(The Doctor smiles and laughs a little.)
CLARA: No. No, don't. Don't. Don't. Don't smile. I will smile first and then you know it's safe to smile.
DOCTOR: Are you cross with me?
CLARA: I am not cross. But if I was cross it would be your fault and. Yes, I am cross.
DOCTOR: I guessed that.
CLARA: I am extremely cross.
DOCTOR: And if I hadn't changed my face, would you be cross?
CLARA: I would be cross if I wasn't cross.
DOCTOR: Why?
CLARA: Why? An ordinary person wants to meet someone that they know very well for lunch. What do they do?
DOCTOR: Well, they probably get in touch and suggest lunch.
CLARA: Mmm hmm. Okay, so what sort of person would put a cryptic note in, in a newspaper advert?
DOCTOR: Well, I wouldn't like to say.
CLARA: Oh, go on, do say.
DOCTOR: Well, I would say that that person would be an egomaniac, needy, game-player sort of person.
CLARA: Ah, thank you. Well, at least that hasn't changed.
DOCTOR: And I don't suppose it ever will.
CLARA: No, I don't suppose it will, either.
DOCTOR: Clara, honestly, I don't want you to change. It was no bother, really. I saw your advert, I figured it out. I'm happy to play your game.
CLARA: No. No, no. I didn't place the ad. You placed the ad.
DOCTOR: No, I didn't.
CLARA: Yes, you placed the ad, I figured it out. Impossible Girl, see? Lunch.
DOCTOR: No, look, the Impossible. That is a message from the Impossible Girl.
CLARA: For the Impossible Girl.
DOCTOR: Ooo.
CLARA: Oh.
DOCTOR: Well, if neither of us placed that ad, who placed that ad?
CLARA: Hang on. Egomaniac, needy, game-player?
DOCTOR: This could be a trap.
CLARA: That was me?
DOCTOR: Never mind that.
CLARA: Yes, I am minding that.
DOCTOR: Clara.
CLARA: You were talking about me?
DOCTOR: Clara, what is happening right now in this restaurant to you and me is more important than your egomania.
CLARA: Nothing is more important than my egomania.
DOCTOR: Right, you actually said that.
CLARA: You never mention that again.
DOCTOR: It's a vanity trap. You're so busy congratulating yourself on solving the puzzle, you don't notice that you're sticking your head in a noose.
CLARA: What are you doing?
(The Doctor pulls a hair from his head.)
CLARA: And that isn't the only grey one, if you are, er, having a cull.
DOCTOR: What, do you have a problem with the grey ones?
CLARA: If I got new hair and it was grey, I would have a problem.
DOCTOR: Yeah, I bet you would.
CLARA: Meaning?
DOCTOR: It's too short.
(He pulls a hair from Clara's head.)
CLARA: Ow.
DOCTOR: Sorry, it was the only one out of place. I'm sure that you would want it killed.
CLARA: Ooo. Are you trying to tell me something?
DOCTOR: I'm trying to measure the air disturbance in the room.
CLARA: Right. Moments when you know you are boring.
(He holds the hair below the table edge and lets it go. It falls slowly downwards.)
DOCTOR: There is something extremely wrong with everybody else in this room.
CLARA: Mmm. Basically, don't you always think that?
DOCTOR: Look at them. Don't look.
CLARA: You just said to look.
DOCTOR: Look without looking.
CLARA: They look fine to me. They're just eating.
DOCTOR: Are they?
(A soup spoon is repeatedly brought up to the mouth and lowered again, still full. Knifes and forks lift and fall over plates.)
CLARA: Okay, no. No, they're not eating.
DOCTOR: Something else they're not doing.
(Another short grey hair falls to the floor.)
DOCTOR: (sotto) Breathing.
CLARA: (sotto) What do we do?
DOCTOR: Well, you don't want to eat, do you?
CLARA: Hmm. Slightly lost my appetite. Ahem. How long before they notice that we're different?
DOCTOR: Not long.
CLARA: Anything we can do?
DOCTOR: How long can you hold your breath?
CLARA: We could just casually stroll out of here, like we've changed our minds.
DOCTOR: Happens all the time.
CLARA: Ha. Course it does.
(They stand. The other diners stop and stand with a clatter of clockwork. They take a step, the diners move towards them.)
CLARA: We could take another look at the menu.
(So they sit down again and the diners return to their tables.)
CLARA: What are they?
DOCTOR: I don't know. But don't worry, because that's not the question. The question is, what is this restaurant?
CLARA: Okay, what is this restaurant?
DOCTOR: I don't know.
(They look at the small menus. A waiter appears at their table.)
DOCTOR: Er, no sausages? Do you? And there's no pictures either. Do you have a children's menu?
(The waiter shines a small green light at the Doctor from the tip of his pencil.)
DOCTOR: Any specials?
WAITER: Liver.
DOCTOR: I don't like liver.
WAITER: Spleen. Brain stem. Eyes.
CLARA: Mmm. Is there a lot of demand for those?
DOCTOR: I don't think that's what's on the menu. I think we are the menu.
WAITER: Lungs. Skin.
DOCTOR: Excuse me.
(The Doctor reaches up and pulls off the waiter's face. There is a metal mesh beneath with a flame behind it.)
CLARA: Okay. Robot in a mask.
DOCTOR: It's a face.
CLARA: Yeah, it's very convincing.
(The Doctor puts it over Clara's face.)
DOCTOR: No, it's a face.
CLARA: Oh!
(She throws it down.)
WAITER: Yes.
DOCTOR: Yes, what?
WAITER: Yes, we have a children's menu.
(Metal arms come out of the back of the bench and hold them tightly around the arms and legs. They are very nice arms, with hands on the end to clasp together firmly. Then the bench descends.)
DOCTOR: You've got to admire their efficiency.
CLARA: Is it okay if I don't?
(They cry out as they go down.)

[Spaceship]

(A large steampunk circular place, all brass and rivets. There are various people standing still in small alcoves around the wall, and the half-face man is seated in a chair in the centre.)
DOCTOR: Hello? Hello, are you the manager? I demand to speak to the manager.
CLARA: This is not a real restaurant, is it?
DOCTOR: Well now, it's more a sort of automated organ collection station for the unwary diner. Sweeney Todd without the pies.
CLARA: So where are we now?
DOCTOR: Factually? An ancient spaceship, probably buried for centuries. Functionally? A larder.
CLARA: So why hasn't somebody come for us?
DOCTOR: We're alive.
CLARA: We're alive in a larder.
DOCTOR: Exactly. It's cheaper than freezing us.
CLARA: Okay.
(The Doctor has shaken his sonic screwdriver out from under his coat.)
DOCTOR: Are you ready?
CLARA: Go for it.
DOCTOR: Don't let it roll away.
CLARA: No.
DOCTOR: We've got one shot at this.
CLARA: Next time, make one that doesn't roll.
DOCTOR: Go.
(The Doctor manages to shake the sonic screwdriver onto the floor near Clara's feet.)
DOCTOR: Have you got it?
CLARA: I can only just about reach it.
DOCTOR: Oh, it's at times like this I miss Amy.
CLARA: Who?
DOCTOR: Nothing.
(Clara gathers the screwdriver between her feet and aims upwards it at the Doctor.)
CLARA: Ready?
DOCTOR: Don't miss.
(She flicks it up into his lap. He winces.)
DOCTOR: Oh.
CLARA: Sorry, did I hit something?
DOCTOR: Oh, the symbolism.
(He gets the screwdriver into his hands and unfastens his bonds with it, then Clara's.)
CLARA: You should make that thing voice-activated. Oh, for God's sake, it is, isn't it?
DOCTOR: I don't want to talk about it.
CLARA: Doctor?
(There is a Chinaman in the nearest alcove.)
DOCTOR: Dormant.
CLARA: How do you know?
DOCTOR: I don't. I'm just hoping.
(They tiptoe away.)
CLARA: So, is it these guys that killed the dinosaur?
DOCTOR: Well, if they're harvesting organs, a dinosaur would have some great stuff.
CLARA: Why would robots need organs? Burke and Hare from space?
DOCTOR: No, but that's a good theory. Droids harvesting spare parts. That rings a bell.
(He stares at the Half-Face Man in the chair in the middle.)
DOCTOR: Captain, my Captain.
CLARA: Can he see us?
DOCTOR: Dormant.
CLARA: Hoping?
DOCTOR: Yep. Oh, look. He's recharging. He's asleep. Doesn't even know we're here.
CLARA: Are you sure?
DOCTOR: Sure. Not sure. One or the other.
CLARA: Okay. So, half-man, half-robot. A cyborg, yeah?
DOCTOR: Oh.
CLARA: Oh?
BOTH: Oh.
DOCTOR: Look at the hands.
CLARA: What about them?
DOCTOR: Look at them.
CLARA: I'm looking.
DOCTOR: They don't match. These hands don't belong to the same body.
(One is large and fleshy, a workman's hand. The other is slim and dainty, never scrubbed a floor in its life.)
CLARA: I don't understand.
DOCTOR: Well, I don't blame you. See this, this is not your normal cyborg. This isn't a man turning himself into a robot. This is a robot turning himself into a man, piece by piece.
CLARA: That's what the restaurant's for.
DOCTOR: Well, it would need a constant supply of spare parts. You can tan skin, but organs rot. Some of that metalwork looks Roman. Wonder how long it's been around, how much of the original is even left? The eyeballs look very fresh, though.
(The arms move. They jump back.)
CLARA: Ah.
(It takes hold of the chair arms, and clockwork whirrs.)
CLARA: (sotto) Is it awake?
DOCTOR: It's waking up. I think. Okay, let's go.
(They tiptoe away, then run through a doorway into a brightly lit corridor. The Doctor turns back.)
DOCTOR: I've seen this before. I'm missing something.
CLARA: Doctor.
DOCTOR: It's the brand new head, rebooting.
CLARA: Come on.
DOCTOR: I've seen this before.
CLARA: Oh, hurry up. Get out.
(Clara returns and pushes the Doctor through the doorway as the Half-Face Man raises his arm and touches his palm. The door comes down between the Doctor and Clara. He tries to sonic it open.)
CLARA: Doctor. Quickly.
(The door lifts a short way. The Half-Face Man is unplugging himself from his chair.)
DOCTOR: Sorry, too slow. There's no point in them catching us both.
CLARA: Well, give me the screwdriver.
DOCTOR: I might need it.
(The Doctor closes the door fully and leaves her.)
CLARA: No. Doctor?
(The Half-Face Man goes to the bench seat, then turns and looks for its occupants. Clara tries standing very still in  a recess as the other occupants of the alcoves become active. One man opens the door and stands next to it.)
DOCTOR [memory]: Something else they're not doing. Breathing. How long can you hold your breath?
(Clara takes a deep breath and holds it as the Half-Face Man walks towards her. He stops and tilts his head as the gears grind, then turns away. A tear rolls down Clara's face. The other robots move, so she imitates their stilted walk and goes through the open door into the bright passageway. She runs around the corner but just sees more robots waiting and the passage going on and on. Her lungs are bursting, so she takes a breath and falls to her knees. She passes out.)
HALF-FACE MAN: Bring her.
(A bald robot picks her up. Clara dreams about her first day teaching at Coal Hill School. The class were completely out of control and laughing at her.)
CLARA [memory]: All right, stop. Stop. Stop it, all of you, now.
BOY [memory]: Ha, ha. It's her first day.
(Clara is laid on the ground in front of the Half-Face Man in his chair.)
CLARA [memory]: If you don't stop it, I'm going to have each and every single one of you kicked out of this school.
(A dark girl's face looms.)
COURTNEY [memory]: Go on, then. Do it.
(Clara wakes up.)
HALF-FACE MAN: Where is the other one? There was another. Where is he? Where is the other? You will tell us, or you will be destroyed.
CLARA: What did you say?
HALF-FACE MAN: You will tell us.
CLARA: Yeah, I know. Or what?
HALF-FACE MAN: You will die.
COURTNEY [memory]: Go on, then. Do it.
(Clara stands.)
CLARA: Go on, then. Do it. I'm not going to answer any of your questions, so you have to do it. You have to kill me. Threats don't work unless you deliver.
HALF-FACE MAN: You will tell us where the other one is.
CLARA: Nope.
HALF-FACE MAN: You will be destroyed.
CLARA: Destroy me, then. And if you don't, then I'm not going to believe a single threat you make from now on. Of course, if I'm dead, then I can't tell you where the other one went then. You need to keep this place down here a secret, don't you? Never start with your final sanction. You've got nowhere to go but backwards.
HALF-FACE MAN: Humans feel pain.
CLARA: Ah. Bigger threat to smaller threat. See what I mean? Backwards.
HALF-FACE MAN: The information can be extracted by means of your suffering.
CLARA: Are you trying to scare me? Well, cos I'm already bloody terrified of dying. And I'll endure a lot of pain for a very long time before I give up the information that's keeping me alive. How long have you got?
(The clockwork whirs, then the Half-Face Man stands up.)
CLARA: All you can offer me is my life. What you can't do is threaten it. You can negotiate.
(The Half-Face Man removes his big right hand and clamps it onto his lapel.)
CLARA: Okay, okay, okay. Okay, yes, yes, yes, I'm crying and it's just because I am very frightened of you. If you know anything about human beings, that means you, you're in a lot trouble.
(The robot has a flame-thrower where his hand was, ready to go.)
HALF-FACE MAN: We will not negotiate.
CLARA: You don't have a choice. I tell you what. I'll answer your questions if you answer mine.
HALF-FACE MAN: We will not answer questions.
CLARA: We'll take turns. I'll go first. Why did you kill the dinosaur?
HALF-FACE MAN: We will not answer questions.
CLARA: Why'd you kill the dinosaur?
HALF-FACE MAN: We will not answer questions!
CLARA: Then you might as well kill me, because I'm not talking again till you do.
HALF-FACE MAN: Within the optic nerve of the dinosaur is material of use to our computer systems.
CLARA: You burned a whole dinosaur for a spare part? No. No, hang on. You know what's in a dinosaur's optic nerve, which means you've seen them before.
HALF-FACE MAN: Where is the other one?
CLARA: How long have you been rebuilding yourselves? Look at the state of you. Is there any real you left? What's the point?
HALF-FACE MAN: We will reach the promised land.
CLARA: The what? The promised land? What's that?
HALF-FACE MAN: Where is the other one?
CLARA: I don't know. But I know where he will be. Where he will always be. If the Doctor is still the Doctor, he will have my back.
Clara reaches behind her.)
CLARA: I'm right, aren't I? Go on. Please, please, go on, say I'm right.
(A hand grabs hers and pulls her back. Then the bald robot removes the skin from his face.)
DOCTOR: Ah. Hello, hello, rubbish robots from the dawn of time. Thank you for all the gratuitous information. Five foot one and crying. You never stood a chance. Stop it.
(The Doctor pulls the flame-thrower arm down and puts his sonic screwdriver into the recharger in the chair. The lights go out.)
DOCTOR: This is your power source. And feeble though it is, I can use it to blow this whole room if I see one thing that I don't like. And that includes karaoke and mime, so take no chances. See, Clara? That's how you disguise yourself as a droid.
CLARA: Yeah, well, I didn't have a lot of time. I'd been suddenly abandoned.
DOCTOR: Yeah, sorry. Well no, actually, I'm not. You're brilliant on adrenaline. And you were out of your depth, sir. Never try and control a control freak.
CLARA: I am not a control freak!
DOCTOR: Yes, ma'am.
CLARA: Oh.
HALF-FACE MAN: Why are you here?
DOCTOR: Why did you invite us? The message, in the paper. That was you, wasn't it? Oh.
(He takes back his screwdriver.)
DOCTOR: I hate being wrong in public. Everybody forget that happened. Clara, say the word.
CLARA: What word?
DOCTOR: They never sent you in here without a word.
CLARA: I don't want to say it.
DOCTOR: I've guessed already.
(Clara touches her top button, which glows bright blue.)
BOTH: Geronimo.
(Two ladies in tight leather catsuits descend from the ceiling by means of long pieces of fabric wrapped around their waists, then pull large swords from the scabbard on their backs.)
VASTRA: Remain still, and lay down your weapons in the name of the British Empire.
STRAX: Argh.
(Their short but robust companion didn't have fabric long enough. He just falls to the floor with his honking great gun.)
VASTRA: Strax.
STRAX: Sorry.
JENNY: I've told you before. Take the stairs.
DOCTOR: Oh, look. The cavalry.
HALF-FACE MAN: I burned an ancient, beautiful creature for one inch of optic nerve. What do you think you can accomplish, little man?
DOCTOR: What do you? Vastra?
(Vastra blocks the flame-thrower with her sword.)
VASTRA: The establishment upstairs has been disabled with maximum prejudice, and the authorities summoned.
CLARA: Hang on, she called the police? We never do that. We should start.
DOCTOR: You see? Destroy us if you will, they're still going to close your restaurant. That was going to sound better.
HALF-FACE MAN: Then we will destroy you.
(All the robots have swords for arms.)
DOCTOR: No, you won't. You're logical. You have restraint. You killed to survive. You're not a murderer.
CLARA: He's not a what? This is a slaughterhouse.
DOCTOR: And how does that make it different from any other restaurant? You weren't vegetarian the last time I checked. This is over. Killing us won't change that. What would be the point?
HALF-FACE MAN: To find the promised land.
DOCTOR: You're millions of years old. It's time you knew, there isn't one.
HALF-FACE MAN: I am in search of paradise.
DOCTOR: Yeah, well, me too. I'm not going to make it either.
(The Half-Face Man knocks the Doctor down.)
CLARA: Doctor!
HALF-FACE MAN: I will leave in the escape capsule. Destroy where necessary.
VASTRA: Escape capsule? This ship is millions of years old. It'll never fly.
HALF-FACE MAN: It has been repaired.
CLARA: What with?
HALF-FACE MAN: You.
STRAX: Defensive positions, everyone.
CLARA: Doctor. He's getting away.
(The Half-Face Man goes up on the bench seat while the rest of the robots encircle our heroes.)
HALF-FACE MAN: Your friend is intelligent. He'll know better than to follow me.
(The Doctor is holding on to a convenient brass handle on the underside of the seat.)

[Outside Mancini's]

(Gregson has brought two uniformed policemen with him.)
GREGSON: Right, here we are. This is the place. Come with me.
(He goes inside.)

[Spaceship]

VASTRA: It is our intent to leave. If it is your intent to stop us, perhaps we should get down to business.

[Mancini's]

(Overturned tables and deactivated robots.)
GREGSON: Dear Lord, what has she landed us with this time?
(The Half-Face Man arrives on the bench seat and stands up.)
HALF-FACE MAN: The restaurant is closed.

[Outside Mancini's]

GREGSON: Keep everyone out. No one goes in there.

[Mancini's]

(The Doctor pours two glasses of whiskey.)
HALF-FACE MAN: What are you doing?
DOCTOR: I've got the horrible feeling I'm going to have to kill you. I thought you might appreciate a drink first. I know I would.
(The Half-Face Man turns back to the control panel in the wall and pulls down a small lever. There is a grinding sound.)

[Outside Mancini's]

(The roof opens.)
GREGSON: Watch out.

[Mancini's]

DOCTOR: Fifty first century, right? Time travelling spaceship crashed in the past. You're trying to get home the long way round.
HALF-FACE MAN: I go to the promised land.
DOCTOR: So you keep saying. Okay, so your restaurant is made out of your old ship. But you're wasting your time. It can't ever fly.
(The Doctor picks up a posy that had been on a table.)
HALF-FACE MAN: The escape pod is viable.
DOCTOR: How? You can't patch up a spaceship with human remains. You know, this really is ringing a bell.
(The room shakes.)
DOCTOR: Okay, that's clever. How are you powering it?
HALF-FACE MAN: Skin.

[Outside Mancini's]

(A giant pink balloon rises out of the building.)
GREGSON: Get to the station. We need more men.
POLICEMAN: What shall I tell them is happening?
GREGSON: Go!

[Spaceship]

VASTRA: How many do you estimate, my dear?
JENNY: More than upstairs. About twenty, thirty?
VASTRA: The ones upstairs were mere decoys. These are battle ready. I anticipate a challenge.
STRAX: Don't worry, my boy, we shall die in glory.
CLARA: Okay. Good-o.

[Mancini's]

(The escape pod is the main room of the restaurant, carried aloft by the pink balloon. The Doctor removes a fuse from the board and reads the inscription.)
DOCTOR: SS Marie Antoinette. Out of control repair droids cannibalising human beings. I know that this is familiar, but I just can't seem to place it.
HALF-FACE MAN: How would you kill me?
DOCTOR: Sister ship of the Madame De Pompadour. No, not getting it.
(He sniffs the posy then throws it aside.)
HALF-FACE MAN: How would you kill me?
DOCTOR: Why don't you have a drink first? It's only human.
HALF-FACE MAN: I am not human.
DOCTOR: Neither am I.

[Spaceship]

STRAX: Why can't you stay dead, coward?
(The robots keep getting back up.)

[Mancini's]

(The balloon and its gondola float over Saint Pauls Cathedral.)
DOCTOR: What do you think of the view?
HALF-FACE MAN: I do not think of it.
DOCTOR: I don't think of it. I don't. Droids and apostrophes, I could write a book. Except you are barely a droid any more. There's more human in you than machine. So tell me, what do you think of the view?
(The Half-Face Man gets up and draws back the net curtain. They are heading towards Westminster.)
HALF-FACE MAN: It is beautiful.
DOCTOR: No, it isn't. It's just far away. Everything looks too small. I prefer it down there. Everything is huge. Everything is so important. Every detail, every moment, every life clung to.
HALF-FACE MAN: How could you kill me?
DOCTOR: For the same reason that you're asking me that question, because you don't really want to carry on. What'll happen to the other droids when you die? You're the control node, aren't you? Presumably they'll deactivate.
HALF-FACE MAN: I will not die. I will reach the promised land.
DOCTOR: There isn't any promised land. This is just. It's a superstition that you have picked up from all the humanity you've stuffed inside yourself.
HALF-FACE MAN: I am not dead.
DOCTOR: You are a broom. Question. You take a broom, you replace the handle, and then later you replace the brush, and you do that over and over again. Is it still the same broom? Answer? No, of course it isn't. But you can still sweep the floor. Which is not strictly relevant, skip that last part. You have replaced every piece of yourself, mechanical and organic, time and time again. There's not a trace of the original you left. You probably can't even remember where you got that face from.
(The Doctor holds up a silver plate between himself and the Half-Face Man. The droid takes it, looks carefully, then drops it.)
HALF-FACE MAN: It cannot end.
DOCTOR: It has to. You know it does. And there's only one way out.
(The Doctor opens the doors.)
HALF-FACE MAN: Self-destruction is against my basic programme.
DOCTOR: And murder is against mine.
(They struggle in the doorway.)

[Spaceship]

(The women's arms are held firmly by the droids, and Vastra's sword is forced from her hands.)
VASTRA: Jenny!
(Sword points are at everyone's throats.)
CLARA: Hold your breath. They're stupid. Everybody hold their breath.
(They do. The droids pause then lower their weapons. Clara picks up the sonic screwdriver and crawls through the droid's legs on her hands and knees.)
VASTRA [OC]: Be brave, my love. I can store oxygen in my lungs. Share with me.
(Vastra and Jenny lock lips. Clara sonicks the door.)

[Mancini's]

HALF-FACE MAN: You are stronger than you look.
DOCTOR: And I'm hoping you are too. This is over. Are you capable of admitting that?
HALF-FACE MAN: Do you have it in you to murder me?
DOCTOR: Those people down there. They're never small to me. Don't make assumptions about how far I will go to protect them, because I've already come a very long way. And unlike you, I don't expect to reach the promised land.
(The Half-Face Man turns off his flame thrower. They release each other.)
DOCTOR: You realise, of course, one of us is lying about our basic programming.
HALF-FACE MAN: Yes.
DOCTOR: And I think we both know who that is.

[Spaceship]

(Strax is about to fire his weapon before he passes out.)
VASTRA: Stop.
(They all breathe. Clara can't get the screwdriver to work for her. As the sword tips are about to pierce their skin, the droids suddenly bend forward at the waist, deactivated. Clara and Jenny faint. A top hat falls past a giant clock face at twenty five past one. A droid is impaled on the cross at the top of the tower. The Doctor looks straight at us.)

[Courtyard]

(Strax drives the women home in the carriage.)
STRAX: Whoa.
JENNY: You're sure he'd come back here?
VASTRA: There's no trace of him in the wreckage. They searched all Parliament Hill. Where else would he go?
(There is a square space in the straw where the Tardis had been stood.)
VASTRA: I fear we have missed him.

[Vastra's chamber]

VASTRA: Please come in.
(Clara is back in her mini-kilt.)
CLARA: I'm not interrupting?
VASTRA: I should be glad of your company. What can I do for you?
CLARA: Ah, well, that's exactly what I was going to ask you. Seems like I'm stuck here now. Got a vacancy?
VASTRA: You would be very welcome to join our little household, but I have it on the highest authority that the Doctor will be returning for you very soon.
CLARA: Whose authority?
VASTRA: Well, the person who knows him best in all the universe.
CLARA: And who's that?
VASTRA: Miss Clara Oswald. Who perhaps has, by instinct, already dressed to leave.
CLARA: I just wanted a change of clothes. I don't think I know who the Doctor is any more.
(They hear the sound of an ancient set of time rotors outside.)
VASTRA: It would seem, my dear, you are very wrong about that. Clara? Give him hell. He'll always need it.

[Tardis]

(The dinosaur sputum has gone from the outside.)
CLARA: You've redecorated.
DOCTOR: Yes.
CLARA: I don't like it.
(The spirit of Patrick Troughton lives on. I like it. Nice straight-forward console, a frieze of roundels on the wall and a high-backed chair for the Doctor. There is even a bookcase.)
DOCTOR: Not completely entirely convinced myself. I think there should be more round things on the walls. I used to have lots of round things. I wonder where I put them? I'm the Doctor. I've lived for over two thousand years, and not all of them were good. I've made many mistakes, and it's about time that I did something about that. Clara, I'm not your boyfriend.
CLARA: I never thought you were.
DOCTOR: I never said it was your mistake.
(He sets the Tardis flying then shows off the red silk lining of his dark blue Crombie coat. Those trousers are a tad too skinny for my taste, especially with the chunky Doc Marten shoes.)
DOCTOR: What do you think?
CLARA: Who put that advert in the paper?
DOCTOR: Who gave you my number? A long time ago, remember? You were given the number of a computer helpline, and you ended up phoning the Tardis. Who gave you that number?
CLARA: The woman. The woman in the shop.
DOCTOR: Then there's a woman out there who's very keen that we stay together.
(The Tardis lands. Sadly, the time rotor does not go up and down.)
DOCTOR: How do you feel on the subject?
CLARA: Am I home?
DOCTOR: If you want to be.
CLARA: I'm sorry. I'm, I'm so, so sorry. But I don't think I know who you are any more.
(Her mobile phone rings.)
DOCTOR: You'd better get that. It might be your boyfriend.
CLARA: Shut up. I don't have a boyfriend.
(Clara goes outside to answer the call.)

[City street]

CLARA: Hello? Hello?
DOCTOR 11 [OC]: It's me.
CLARA: Yes, it's you. Who's this?
DOCTOR 11 [OC]: It's me, Clara. The Doctor.
CLARA: What do you mean, the Doctor?

[Trenzalore / City street]

DOCTOR 11: I'm phoning you from Trenzalore.
CLARA: I don't
DOCTOR 11: From before I changed. I mean it's all still to happen for me. It's coming. Oh, it's a-coming.
(Back then, Clara replaced the Tardis police phone back on its hook.)
DOCTOR 11: Not long now. I can feel it.
CLARA: Why? Why would you do this?
DOCTOR 11: Because I think it's going to be a whopper, and I think you might be scared. And however scared you are, Clara, the man you are with right now, the man I hope you are with, believe me, he is more scared than anything you can imagine right now and he, he needs you.
DOCTOR: So who is it?
DOCTOR 11: Is that the Doctor?
DOCTOR: Is that the Doctor?
CLARA: Yes.
DOCTOR 11: He sounds old. Please tell me I didn't get old. Anything but old. I was young. Oh, is he grey?
CLARA: Yes.
DOCTOR 11: Clara, please, hey, for me, help him. Go on. And don't be afraid. Goodbye, Clara. Miss ya.

[City street]

(Clara is sniffling.)
DOCTOR: Well?
CLARA: Well what?
DOCTOR: He asked you a question. Will you help me?
CLARA: You shouldn't have been listening.
DOCTOR: I wasn't. I didn't need to. That was me talking. You can't see me, can you? You look at me, and you can't see me. Have you any idea what that's like? I'm not on the phone, I'm right here, standing in front of you. Please, just, just see me.
(Clara walks forward and studies his face carefully. Then she smiles a little.)
CLARA: Thank you.
DOCTOR: For what?
CLARA: Phoning.
(She throws her arms around his neck.)
DOCTOR: I, I don't think that I'm a hugging person now.
CLARA: I'm not sure you get a vote.
DOCTOR: Whatever you say.
CLARA: This isn't my home, by the way.
(She lets go.)
DOCTOR: Sorry. I'm sorry about that. I missed.
CLARA: Where are we?
DOCTOR: Glasgow, I think.
CLARA: Ah. You'll fit right in. (Scots) Scottish.
DOCTOR: Right. Shall we, er. Do you want to go and get some coffee, or chips, or something? Or chips and coffee?
CLARA: Coffee. Coffee would be great. You're buying.
DOCTOR: I don't have any money.
CLARA: You're fetching, then.
DOCTOR: I'm not sure that I'm the fetching sort.
CLARA: Yeah, still not sure you get a vote.

[Garden]

(The Half-Face man wakes in a place looking very like the Pompeian Garden at Dyffren House, also used in the Sarah Jane Adventure, The Eternity Trap. The wisteria is in full bloom. He puts on his top hat. A woman in Edwardian costume is sitting on the edge of the fountain. She is the Gatekeeper of the Nethersphere, according to the BBC's own Doctor Who Blog.)
MISSY: Hello. I'm Missy. You made it. I hope my boyfriend wasn't too mean to you.
HALF-FACE MAN: Boy friend?
MISSY: Now, did he push you out of that thing, or did you fall? Couldn't really tell. He can be very mean sometimes. Except to me, of course, because he loves me so much. I do like his new accent, though. Think I might keep it.
HALF-FACE MAN: Where am I?
MISSY: Where do you think you are? Look around you. You made it. The promised land. Paradise. Welcome to heaven.
(She snaps her teeth together and dances around the water feature.)
[Fighter]

(A small space fighter is dodging weapons fire and asteroids. It's female pilot has an injured co-pilot.)
JOURNEY: Aristotle, this is Wasp Delta, do you hear me? Stay with me, Kai. Stay with me, please. Aristotle! We have been hit. Major damage. Aristotle!
(Her enemy is a massive flying saucer.)
JOURNEY: Aristotle! The enemy are right on top of us.
(The fighter is hit.)
JOURNEY: I'm sorry.

[Saucer]

DALEK: Exterminate.
(A second laser pulse finds its mark. The little fighter explodes as Journey screams.)

[Tardis]

(Journey opens her eyes to see the brass handles of the console. She sees the Doctor and scrambles for her hand gun, and keeps it pointing at him.)
DOCTOR: You'll probably feel a bit sick. Please, don't be.
(The Doctor is holding a card tray with two takeaway coffees in it.)
JOURNEY: Where's my brother?
DOCTOR: Hello, I'm the Doctor.
JOURNEY: He was right beside me. Where's Kai? How did I get here?
DOCTOR: I materialised a time capsule exactly round you and saved your life one second before your ship exploded, but do please keep crying.
JOURNEY: My brother's just died.
DOCTOR: His sister didn't. You're very welcome. Put the gun down.
JOURNEY: Or what?
DOCTOR: Or you might shoot me. Then where will you be?
JOURNEY: In charge of your vessel.
DOCTOR: You'd starve to death trying to find the light switch. Who are you?
JOURNEY: I'm Lieutenant Journey Blue of the Combined Galactic Resistance. I demand you take me back to my command ship, the Aristotle, which is currently located
DOCTOR: No. Hey, not like that.
JOURNEY: You will take me back to my command ship, which is currently positioned
DOCTOR: No, no. Come on. Not like that. Not like that. Get it right
(Journey lowers her gun.)
JOURNEY: Will you take me back to my ship? Please?
DOCTOR: The Aristotle's the big fella parked in the asteroid belt, yeah?
(The Doctor sets the Tardis moving.)
JOURNEY: It's shielded.
DOCTOR: More or less.
(The Aristotle is hiding by one edge of a long thin asteroid. Journey opens the Tardis door.)
DOCTOR: Dry your eyes, Journey Blue. Crying's for civilians. It's how we communicate with you lot.

[Med Sec 07]

(The Tardis has neatly parked herself in a corner of a large section. There are pieces of metal debris and a soldier is driving a small buggy in the background.)
JOURNEY: It's smaller on the outside.
DOCTOR: It's a bit more exciting when you go the other way. This isn't a battleship. Medical insignia. It's a hospital.
(An older man with a greying beard speaks. He is backed up by armed soldiers.)
MORGAN: We don't need hospitals now. The Daleks don't leave any wounded, and we don't take any prisoners.
DOCTOR: I saved your little friend here, if that's in any way relevant to mention.
JOURNEY: That's true, sir. He did.
MORGAN: Thank you.
DOCTOR: You're welcome. I wish I could've done more.
MORGAN: Then you should have.
DOCTOR: Okay.
MORGAN: But you did save Journey, and for that I am personally grateful.
DOCTOR: Well
MORGAN: However, the security of this base is absolute. So we're still going to kill you.
DOCTOR: Oh, it's a roller coaster with you, isn't it?
MORGAN: Shoot him, bag him and throw him outside.
JOURNEY: No! Stop!
MORGAN: I'm sorry. He might be a duplicate.
JOURNEY: He's a doctor. And we have a patient, don't we, Uncle?

[Corridor]

DOCTOR: Why does a hospital need a doctor?
MORGAN: The Aristotle wasn't always hidden. The Daleks got here before us.
JOURNEY: You don't like soldiers much, do you?
DOCTOR: You don't need to be liked. You've got all the guns.

[Lab 01]

(The soldiers stand guard at door 078.)
DOCTOR: Wow! A moleculon nanoscaler.
(A large clear tube with bench seats down the inside. A bit like a decompression chamber for divers.)
JOURNEY: You know what it does, then?
DOCTOR: It miniaturises living matter. What's the medical application, though? Do you use it to shrink the surgeons so they can climb inside the patients?
MORGAN: Exactly.
DOCTOR: Fantastic idea for a movie. Terrible idea for a proctologist. Are you going to miniaturise me?
MORGAN: You're a doctor, aren't you?
(He opens a pair of secure doors further along.)
MORGAN: And this is your patient.
(A scratched eyepiece glows blue.)
DOCTOR: No, you don't understand. You can't put me in there.
RUSTY: Doctor?
(This is a battered 2005 style Dalek with various cables going into its dome.)

[Coal Hill school playground]
(A short haired, dark-skinned man with a neatly trimmed short beard shouts in the playground.)
DANNY: Atten-shun. Look at you lot. I've never seen such a miserable bunch. What are you, children?
FLEMING: Yes, sir.
(Danny and his troop are wearing matching t-shirts.)
DANNY: You think you're funny, Fleming?
FLEMING: Yes, sir.
DANNY: All right, me too.
(The school bell rings.)
DANNY: Dismissed.
(The members of the Coal Hill Cadet Corps run off to the school building.)
BOY: What you doing, Fleming?
(Clara smiles at Danny and follows the children inside.)

[Secretary's office]

(A little later, Danny enters, now dressed in shirt and tie, to check the timetable on the notice board for any changes.)
SECRETARY: So, Mister Pink, did you have a good weekend?
DANNY: Yeah, I did, thanks.
SECRETARY: Yeah, I'll bet you did. What did you get up to?
DANNY: Er, you know. A bit of reading.
SECRETARY: Oh, I bet you were reading.
DANNY: I was, yeah.
SECRETARY: Yeah, I bet you were.
DANNY: Well, yeah, I was.
SECRETARY: I know your type.
(A schoolgirl is listening at the public counter.)
COURTNEY: She wishes.
SECRETARY: Be quiet, you.

[Maths classroom]

DANNY: So that's all the questions on page 32, except the last one, and then everything on page 33. All that in for Thursday. Any questions?
FLEMING: Sir? Have you ever killed a man?
(Groans from the rest of the class.)
DANNY: I was a soldier. There were other soldiers and some of them weren't on our side. I shall leave the rest to your imagination. And, please, think of another question?
FLEMING: Okay. Have you ever killed anyone who wasn't a soldier?
DANNY: Just to repeat, that's all the questions on page 32, except the last one, and then everything on page 33. All that in for Thursday. Is everyone clear?
CLASS: Yes, sir.
(The class watch a lone tear roll down Danny's cheek.)

[Staff room]

(The staff are putting on their coats to leave. Clara is discussing timetables with the headmaster.)
CLARA: Fine, I'll take that class and then, they can do some of the test.
ARMITAGE: I know. Oh, Clara, you've not met Danny Pink yet? New fella, maths. Danny? Clara Oswald.
CLARA: Hey.
ARMITAGE: English.
DANNY: Hey, nice to meet you.
CLARA: You too.
ARMITAGE: Want to watch yourself around him. Bit of a lady-killer, but always denies it.
DANNY: I am not a lady-killer.
ARMITAGE: See what I mean? Oh, Beth, can I have a word?
BETH [OC]: Yeah, yeah, sure.
CLARA: Er, was it you that I saw outside doing the soldiery thing?
DANNY: Ah yeah, probably. The Coal Hill Cadets. Just a bit of fun.
CLARA: What, teaching them how to shoot people?
DANNY: There's a bit more to modern soldiering than just shooting people. I like to think there's a moral dimension.
CLARA: Ah, you shoot people then cry about it afterwards?
DANNY: Ah.
CLARA: Something wrong?
DANNY: Nothing, no. Sorry, no, nothing. I just. I didn't think they'd say anything, that's all.
CLARA: Sorry?
DANNY: Have they told everyone?
CLARA: No, no, no. As far as I know, nobody has told anybody anything. What are you talking about?
DANNY: Why did you just say the crying thing?
CLARA: I was being funny.
DANNY: Why?
CLARA: I just do that.
DANNY: Why?
CLARA: I don't know.
DANNY: Anyway I, er, I've left some stuff in my class.
CLARA: Okay, see you.
DANNY: See you.
CLARA: Er, are you going to the, er, leaving thing tonight for Cathy?
DANNY: Um.

[Maths classroom]

DANNY: Yeah. I wasn't going, but I am now, because you're going to be there, and suddenly it seems like the best idea ever.

[Staff room]

DANNY: No, I'm not.
CLARA: Oh, okay, never mind.
DANNY: Good night.
CLARA: Change your mind.
DANNY: Excuse me?
CLARA: I'm going. Er, I'll give you a lift. Why not? 

[Maths classroom]

DANNY: Actually, now that you mention it, seems like the best plan ever. Thank you.

[Staff room]

DANNY: No, I've got some reading.
CLARA: Ah, okay. Maybe some other time, then?

[Maths classroom]

DANNY: Thank you!
(He bangs his forehead on his desk.)
CLARA: Ahem. Is the wooden sound you or or the desk?
DANNY: How long have you been there?
CLARA: Longer than you would like.
DANNY: Okay.
CLARA: Are you going to look that terrified when you take me out for a drink?
DANNY: I, I absolutely promise I won't.
CLARA: Play your cards right and you might.

[Supply cupboard]

(Clara enters, and nearly walks into the tray of coffees that the Doctor is holding out to her. The Tardis just fits the width of the back of the cupboard.)
CLARA: Where the hell have you been?
DOCTOR: You sent me for coffee.
CLARA: Three weeks ago. In Glasgow.
DOCTOR: Three weeks, that's a long time.
CLARA: In Glasgow. That's dead in a ditch.
DOCTOR: It's not my fault, I got distracted.
CLARA: By what?
DOCTOR: You can always find something. Come on.

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: Why were you smiling?
CLARA: Was I? No, I wasn't.
DOCTOR: You were smiling at nothing. I'd almost say you were in love, but to be honest
CLARA: Honest?
DOCTOR: You're not a young woman any more.
CLARA: Yes, I am.
(Clara takes the coffees and puts them on the console.)
DOCTOR: Well, you don't look it.
CLARA: I do look it.
DOCTOR: Oh, that's right, keep your spirits up, Clara, Clara, Clara, Clara. Clara, Clara. Clara, Clara. I need something from you. I need the truth.
CLARA: Okay. Right, what is it? What's
(They sit on the console steps.)
CLARA: You're scared.
DOCTOR: I'm terrified.
CLARA: Of what?
DOCTOR: The answer to my next question, which must be honest and cold and considered, without kindness or restraint. Clara, be my pal and tell me, am I a good man?
CLARA: I don't know.
DOCTOR: Neither do I.
(He gets up and goes to the console.)
CLARA: Er, hey, no offence, but I've got plans.
DOCTOR: I need you.
CLARA: Right. Where are we going?
(He starts the Tardis flying.)
DOCTOR: Into darkness.

[Rusty's room]

RUSTY: Doctor.
DOCTOR: How do you know who I am?
MORGAN: He doesn't. We promised him medical assistance.
RUSTY: Are you my doctor?
JOURNEY: We found it floating in space.
MORGAN: We thought it was deactivated, so we tried to disassemble it.
DOCTOR: You didn't realise there was a living creature inside.
JOURNEY: Not till it started screaming.
RUSTY: Help me.
DOCTOR: Why would I do that? Why would any living creature help you?
RUSTY: Daleks will die.
DOCTOR: Die all you like. Not my problem.
RUSTY: Daleks must be destroyed.
DOCTOR: Daleks must be de. What did you just say?
RUSTY: All Daleks must die. I will destroy the Daleks. Destroy the Daleks. Destroy the Daleks!

[Tardis]

(Drinking her coffee.)
CLARA: A good Dalek?
DOCTOR: There's no such thing.
CLARA: That's a bit inflexible. Not like you. I'd almost say prejudiced.
DOCTOR: (sigh) Do I pay you? I should give you a raise.
(The Tardis lands.)
CLARA: You're not my boss, you're one of my hobbies.
DOCTOR: Come on.

[Lab 01]

JOURNEY: That was quick.
DOCTOR: This is gun girl. She's got a gun, and she's a girl. This is a sort of boss one. Are you the same one as before?
MORGAN: Yes.
DOCTOR: I think he's probably her uncle, but I may have made that up to pass the time while they were talking. This is Clara, not my assistant. She's, er, some other word.
CLARA: I'm his carer.
DOCTOR: Yeah, my carer. She cares so I don't have to.

[Rusty's room]

RUSTY: Doctor.
DOCTOR: Hello again.
RUSTY: Will you help me?
CLARA: Will you?
DOCTOR: A Dalek so damaged, it's turned good. Morality as malfunction. How do I resist?
RUSTY: Daleks must die. Daleks must die.
CLARA: So, what do we do with a moral Dalek, then?
DOCTOR: We get into its head.
CLARA: Mmm. How do you get into a Dalek's head?
DOCTOR: That wasn't a metaphor. 

[Lab 01]

(They go to the moleculon nanoscaler.)
JOURNEY: These are nanocontrollers. Once we're miniaturised, they take over the molecular compression. When the mission's over, hit the button.
(Journey puts the bracelet on Clara's wrist.)
JOURNEY: Are you sure you understand?
CLARA: Why wouldn't I?
JOURNEY: Because this is a dangerous mission and you look like a school teacher.
CLARA: I am a school teacher. Still didn't catch your name.
JOURNEY: Journey Blue.
CLARA: Blue?
JOURNEY: Blue, yes. Problem?
CLARA: No. Er, I just met a soldier called Pink.
JOURNEY: Lucky fella.
CLARA: Lucky?
JOURNEY: From the way you smile.
CLARA: So, er, who makes you smile or is nobody up to the job?
JOURNEY: My brother. But he burned to death a couple of hours ago, so he's really letting me down today. Excuse me.
DOCTOR: What are those ones for? I don't need armed baby-sitters.
GRETCHEN: We're not baby-sitters.
ROSS: We're here to shoot you dead if you turn out to be a Dalek spy.
DOCTOR: Well, that's a relief. I hate baby-sitters.
JOURNEY: Okay, listen up. Now, remember, do not hold your breath when the nanoscaler engages. You'll feel like you want to, but you must keep breathing normally during the miniaturisation process.
CLARA: Why?
DOCTOR: Ever microwaved a lasagne without pricking the film on top?
CLARA: It explodes.
DOCTOR: Don't be lasagne.
MORGAN: Nanoscaler engaging in five four three two. Nanoscaler engaging now. 
COMPUTER: Nanoscaling in progress.
(A crossbeam passes back and forth over chamber id AR-O13-AR-F74 until it shrinks with a bump.)
COMPUTER: Nanoscaling complete.
MORGAN: Nanoscaling successful. Everyone okay in there?
(The chamber is carefully picked up with a pair of tweezers.)
JOURNEY [OC]: We made it.

[Nanoscaler]

JOURNEY: Nobody popped.
CLARA: Whoa. Ha. I can't believe this.
DOCTOR: No, neither can I.
(The chamber is injected into Rusty's eye-piece. The Doctor reaches out and the surface wibbles.)

[Lab 01]

MORGAN: We'll be following you all the way, Rescue One. Good luck all of you.
(The Doctor's arm distorts as he slowly reaches into the blue 'eye' on the end of the stalk. Then they all push their way through.)
COMPUTER: Integration complete. Dalek levels steady.

[Eye stalk]

CLARA: That was weird.
DOCTOR: You've seen nothing yet.
CLARA: What are the lights?
DOCTOR: Visual impulses travelling towards the brain.
CLARA: Beautiful.
DOCTOR: Welcome to the most dangerous place in the universe.

[Lab 01]

(The computer is monitoring their locations inside Rusty.)
JOURNEY [OC]: Entering the cranial ledge now.

[Cranial ledge]

JOURNEY: Here.
CLARA: Oh, my God.
(They look down from the ledge onto the red tentacled blob that is the organic part of Rusty. Should really be green, but times have obviously changed. Cables run down into it.)
DOCTOR: Behold, the belly of the beast.
CLARA: It's amazing.
ROSS: It's huge.
GRETCHEN: No, Ross. We're tiny.
CLARA: So how big is it, that living part, compared to me and you, right now?
DOCTOR: You see all those cables?
CLARA: Yeah.
DOCTOR: They're not all cables.
ROSS: Does it know we're here?
JOURNEY: It's what invited us in.
(The Doctor looks at banks of vertical lights around the inside of part of the ledge.)
DOCTOR: Now, this is the cortex vault, a supplementary electronic brain. Memory banks, but more than that. This is what keeps the Dalek pure.
GRETCHEN: How are Daleks pure?
DOCTOR: Dalek mutants are born hating. This is what stokes the fire, extinguishes even the tiniest glimmer of kindness or compassion. Imagine the worst possible thing in the universe, then don't bother, because you're looking at it right now. This is evil refined as engineering.
RUSTY [OC]: Doctor?
DOCTOR: Oh, hello, Rusty. You don't mind if I call you Rusty? We're going to need to come down there with you. Medical examination, and all that.
GRETCHEN: What, with those tentacles and things?
JOURNEY: How close do we have to get?
DOCTOR: Well, you know, we're never going to insert a thermometer from up here.
(Journey nods, and Ross fires a harpoon into Rusty's ledge. It hurts him. )
DOCTOR: No. No, no, no, no! Stop, stop, stop, you idiot!
(Another harpoon goes in.)
JOURNEY: We need a way down, the only way
DOCTOR: This is a Dalek, not a machine. It's a perfect analogue of a living being, and you just hurt it. So what's going to happen now?
CLARA: Oh, God.
GRETCHEN: What? What is it?
CLARA: Antibodies?
DOCTOR: Dalek antibodies.
(Little round objects fly into view.)
DOCTOR: Nobody move Any attempt to help him, or attack those things, will identify you as a secondary source of infection. Stay still!
(The antibodies open to reveal a big blue eye, then surround Ross.)
CLARA: But the Dalek wants us in here. Why is it attacking?
DOCTOR: Can you control your antibodies?
JOURNEY: Ross, stay calm. We're going to get you out of this.
CLARA: Can you?
DOCTOR: Ross, swallow that.
ROSS: What is it?
DOCTOR: Trust me.
(Ross swallows the little whatever it was that the Doctor threw to him.)
ROSS: Now what?
(An antibody aims a painful bright beam at him.)
JOURNEY: Ross!
(Ross disintegrates.)
CLARA: Oh, my God. What's it doing?
(The antibody sucks up the remains and its blue eye turns red,)
DOCTOR: The hoovering.
(The antibody flies away. The Doctor raises his sonic screwdriver.)
DOCTOR: Gotcha.
CLARA: What did you give him?
DOCTOR: Oh, just a spare power cell, but I can track the radiation signature. I need to know where they dump the bodies.
JOURNEY: I thought you were saving him.
DOCTOR: He was dead already. I was saving us. Follow me and run.
CLARA: Run!
(The other antibodies follow at a distance. The Doctor stops at a hole in the ledge.)
DOCTOR: They've dumped him in here. Organic refuse disposal. We need to get in there.
CLARA: Why?
(Gretchen and Journey shoot at the antibodies.)
DOCTOR: Those antibodies won't give up until we're inside there. I'd rather go in alive than dead.
JOURNEY: You don't know where it goes.
DOCTOR: Yes, I do. Away from here. Now in. In! In!
(Clara jumps down the hole.)
GRETCHEN: I can hold them off.
DOCTOR: No, you can't.
(He tries his screwdriver on the antibodies.)
DOCTOR: Pull back. Down. Jump, everyone, jump.
(The Doctor goes in last, and enjoys the ride.)

[Organic refuse disposal]

(They splosh into liquid gunk. Shades of Star Wars episode IV.)
CLARA: Urgh. What is this stuff?
DOCTOR: People. The Daleks need protein. Occasionally, they harvest from their victims. This is a feeding tube.
JOURNEY: Is Ross here?
DOCTOR: Yeah. Top layer, if you want to say a few words.
(Journey pushes the Doctor against the wall.)
JOURNEY: A man has just died. You will not talk like that.
DOCTOR: A lot of people have died. Everything in here is dead, and do you know why that's good?
JOURNEY: There is nothing good about that.
DOCTOR: Nothing is alive in here, so logically this is the weakest spot in the Dalek's internal security. Nobody guards the dead. Mortuaries and larders, always the easiest to break out of. Oh, I've lived a life Tell Uncle Stupid that we're in. Ah ha! A bolt hole.
(The Doctor unscrews the large bolt with the sonic screwdriver.)
CLARA:  He'll get us out of here. The difficult part is not killing him before he can.
DOCTOR: Bolt hole. Actually, a hole for a bolt. Does nobody get that?
CLARA: Also, there's the puns.
DOCTOR: Watch it, decontamination tubes are hot.

[Lab 01]

(The schematic on the screen shows our heroes' Nanotags are just over half way down Rusty's innards, below where he is sitting by the plunger and gun arms.)
COMPUTER: Anomaly threat displaced. Dalek levels returning to normal parameters.
JOURNEY [OC]: Rescue One to Mission Control.
MORGAN: This is Blue, Rescue One. Report.

[Decontamination tube]

JOURNEY:The Dalek has an internal defence mechanism.

[Lab 01]

JOURNEY [OC]: We've lost Ross.
MORGAN: What kind of defence mechanism?

[Decontamination tube]

MORGAN [OC]: That thing knows you're in there to help it.
JOURNEY: Yeah, well, who knows? It's a Dalek. We're going to continue the mission.
DOCTOR: Are you all right back there? It's a bit narrow, isn't it?
CLARA: Any remarks about my hips will not be appreciated.
DOCTOR: Ach, your hips are fine. You're built like a man.
CLARA: (sotto) Thanks.

[Power unit]

(The Doctor helps Clara down from the tube.)
DOCTOR: What's that noise? Are you wearing a Geiger counter?
GRETCHEN: Standard battle equipment. That's just low level radiation.
(There are large printed circuit boards here.)
DOCTOR: But stronger down here, for some reason. Gimme.
MORGAN [OC]: Was that him?

[Lab 01]

MORGAN: How's he working out?
JOURNEY [OC]: It's hard to say.

[Power unit]

JOURNEY: He's
(The Doctor sweeps the circuit boards with the Geiger counter.)
DOCTOR: I've got it. I know what's wrong with Rusty.
CLARA: Okay, that's good. Is that good?
DOCTOR: Well, you know how I said this was the most dangerous place in the universe? I was wrong. It's way more dangerous than that.

[Lab 01]

JOURNEY [OC]: Colonel, we have radiation indicators red-lining in here. Could be that the Dalek is badly damaged than we thought.
MORGAN: Copy that.
DOCTOR [OC]: Old Rusty here is suffering a trionic radiation leak.

[Power unit]

DOCTOR: It's poisoning the Dalek and us. Just as well we're here.
JOURNEY: Really? Perhaps we should get out while we can. Why should we trust a Dalek? Why would it change? 

[Organic compartment]

(Rusty is watching them on an internal monitor.)
DOCTOR [on screen]: Good question. Rusty? What changed you?
RUSTY: I saw beauty.
DOCTOR [on screen]: You saw what?
RUSTY: In the silence and the cold, I saw worlds burning.
JOURNEY [on screen]: That's not beauty, that's destruction.
RUSTY: I saw

[Power unit]

RUSTY [OC]: More.
DOCTOR: What? What did you see?
RUSTY [OC]: The birth of a star.
DOCTOR: Stars are born every day. You've seen a million stars born. So what?
RUSTY [OC]: Daleks have destroyed a million stars.

[Organic compartment]

DOCTOR [on screen]: Oh, millions and millions. Trust me, I keep count.
RUSTY: And yet, new stars are born.
DOCTOR [on screen]: Every time.

[Power unit]

RUSTY [OC]: Resistance is futile.
DOCTOR: Resistance to what?
RUSTY [OC]: Life returns. Life prevails. Resistance is futile.
DOCTOR : So you saw a star being born, and you learned something. Oh, Dalek, do not be lying to me. Come on.

[Lab 01]

JOURNEY [OC]: Heading for the Trionic power cells, Colonel.
MORGAN: Radiation approxing two hundred Rads. Danger levels.
COMPUTER: Radiation levels increasing.

[Power cell]

(Directly underneath Rusty.)
DOCTOR: We're at the heart of the Dalek.
CLARA: It's incredible.
(Energy arcs above them.)
JOURNEY: Geiger counter's off the scale. Looks like it's about to blow.
DOCTOR: Good.
JOURNEY: How is that good?
DOCTOR: Well, I like a bit of pressure. Rusty, can you hear me?
RUSTY [OC]: Doctor?
DOCTOR: Rusty, we've found the damage. I'm sealing up the breach in your power cell.
(He uses the sonic screwdriver as a welder.)
DOCTOR: No more radiation poisoning. Good as new. There. Job done.
CLARA: That's it? Just like that?
DOCTOR: An anti-climax once in a while is good for my hearts. Rusty? How do you feel? Rusty? Rusty? Rusty.
RUSTY [OC]: The malfunction is corrected.
JOURNEY: What's happened?
DOCTOR: Not entirely sure.
(Lights come on.)
JOURNEY: It's like it's waking up.
DOCTOR: Rusty, come on, talk to me. What's going on?
RUSTY [OC]: The malfunction is corrected. All systems are functioning.

[Rusty's room]

RUSTY: Weapons charged.

[Power cell]

DOCTOR: Oh, no, no, no.

[Rusty's room]

RUSTY: Exterminate. Exterminate.
(Rusty kills the man keeping watch through the window in his cell door. It is a return to the classic black and white skeleton effect as the victim dies. Rusty breaks free and Morgan sounds the alarm.)

[Power cell]

DOCTOR: No, no, no,
RUSTY [OC]: Exterminate.

[Lab 01]

RUSTY: Exterminate.

[Power cell]

(The team are thrown about as Rusty moves.)
RUSTY [OC]: The Daleks will be victorious The rebels will be exterminated.
JOURNEY: Colonel? What's happening out there?

[Lab 01]

(Morgan and his troops are too busy shooting at Rusty.)
RUSTY: Exterminate. Exterminate. Exterminate. Exterminate. Exterminate. Exterminate.
(Two more soldiers die.)
RUSTY: Exterminate. (and another) Exterminate.
MORGAN: Pull back, pull back.
(Rusty plugs into a console with his plunger arm.)
RUSTY: Dalek fleet. Communications open.

[Saucer]

DALEK: The rebel ship has been identified.
DALEK 2: Prepare fourteen Daleks.

[Power cell]

CLARA: Doctor, what happened?
DOCTOR: Do you see?
CLARA: Do I see what?
DOCTOR: Daleks don't turn good. It was just radiation affecting its brain chemistry, nothing more than that. No miracle.
JOURNEY: Let me get this straight. We had a good Dalek, and we made it bad again? That's all we've done?
DOCTOR: There was never a good Dalek. There was a broken Dalek and we repaired it.
JOURNEY: You were supposed to be helping us.
DOCTOR: I gave it a shot. It didn't work out. It was a Dalek, what did you expect?
JOURNEY: No more talking. You are done! Okay, new objective. We are taking this Dalek down.
RUSTY [OC]: Exterminate. Exterminate.
DOCTOR: What's that look for?
CLARA: It's the look you get when I'm about to slap you.
(And she does. Hard.)
DOCTOR: Ow. Clara.
CLARA: Are we going to die in here? I mean, there's a little bit of you that's pleased. The Daleks are evil after all. Everything makes sense. The Doctor is right.
DOCTOR: Daleks are evil. Irreversibly so. That's what we just learned.
CLARA: No, Doctor, that is not what we just learned.

[Aristotle]

RUSTY [OC]: Exterminate. Exterminate.
MORGAN: Secure the door! Wasp fighters to action stations. Wasp fighters to action stations.
SOLDIER [OC]: The security systems have been hacked. We don't have access to the Wasps.
MORGAN: Then God save us all.

[Power cell]

JOURNEY: We need to place these charges for maximum effect. I'm going to scan the rest of the architecture for weaknesses.
CLARA: One question.
JOURNEY: No time.
(Journey and Gretchen place grenades on handy surfaces.)
CLARA: Why did we come here today? What was the point? You. You thought there was a good Dalek. What difference would one good Dalek make?
DOCTOR: All the difference in the universe, but it's impossible.
CLARA: Is that a fact? Is that really what we've learned today? Think about it. Is that what we've learned?

[Aristotle]

MORGAN: Journey, what the hell's happening? That thing's set the Daleks on us.

[Power cell]

MORGAN [OC]: And it's locked us out of our defences.

[Aristotle]

MORGAN: Journey, you're the Aristotle's only hope.

[Power cell]

MORGAN [OC]: I need you to destroy that Dalek.

[Aristotle]

RUSTY: The rebels will be exterminated.
MORGAN: Whatever it takes.

[Power cell]

JOURNEY: Understood, Uncle.

[Aristotle]

MORGAN: I'm sorry.

[Power cell]

JOURNEY: Yeah. Me too.
DOCTOR: Clara Oswald, do I really not pay you?
CLARA: You couldn't afford me.
DOCTOR: Whatever you're going to do, don't do it This Dalek must not be destroyed. We can do better.
JOURNEY: Are you out of your mind?
DOCTOR: No, I'm inside a Dalek. I'm standing where I've never been. We cannot waste this chance. It won't come again.
JOURNEY: What chance? I have my orders.
DOCTOR: Soldiers take orders.
JOURNEY: And I'm a soldier.
DOCTOR: A Dalek is a better soldier than you will ever be. You can't win this way.
(Journey holds up a grenade to pull the pin, then puts it down again.)
JOURNEY: Bah! So what do we do?
DOCTOR: Something better.

[Saucer]

DALEK: Prepare to board the rebel ship. We must find our comrade Dalek. Spare no humans. Exterminate them all.
DALEKS: Exterminate. Exterminate. Exterminate.
(The Saucer flies over the asteroid where the Aristotle is hiding.)

[Inner casing]

(They climb up to a recess.)
DOCTOR: The Dalek isn't just some angry blob in a Dalekanium tank. If it was, the radiation would have turned it into a raging lunatic.
JOURNEY: It is a raging lunatic, it's a Dalek.
DOCTOR: But for a moment, it wasn't. The radiation allowed it to expand its consciousness, to consider things beyond its natural terms of reference. It became good. That means a good Dalek is possible. That's what we learned today. Am I right, teach?
CLARA: Top of the class.
JOURNEY: But now it's back to how it was.
DOCTOR: But what it saw, what it felt, is still there.
JOURNEY: Yeah, I'm not really seeing that.
DOCTOR: Not here. There.
(He points upwards.)
JOURNEY: You mean in the cortex vault?
CLARA: The evil engineering?
DOCTOR: Every memory recorded. Some suppressed, but all still intact. We need to show the Dalek that star being born again. Recreate that moment. You need to get up there, find that moment and reawaken it.
CLARA: Me?
DOCTOR: Yes, you. Good idea.
CLARA: How?
DOCTOR: Haven't the foggiest. Do a clever thing. And then once you've done it, the Dalek will be suggestible to new ideas. It will be open again. And I will show it something that will change its mind forever
JOURNEY: What? Not a clue.

[Aristotle docking port]

DALEK [OC]: Docking initiated.
(The space doors are blown in.)
DALEK [OC]: Pressures equalised. Boarding corp, begin attack.
DALEK 2: Advance. Exterminate the humans.
DALEKS: Seek, locate, destroy. Surrender is not accepted.
(Note - as they come through the burning spacedoors, some of the rubber plungers catch fire.)

[Inner casing]

JOURNEY: This is crazy. There is no way that we can get back up there in time.
GRETCHEN: Yes, there is.
JOURNEY: No, Gretchen. It'll bring the antibodies back down on us.
GRETCHEN: Tell me the truth. Is he mad, or is he right? I've come this far. Probably going to die anyway. Wouldn't mind something to do for the rest of my life. Is he mad, or is he right? CLARA: Hand on my heart? Most days he's both.
GRETCHEN: One question, then. Is this worth it?
DOCTOR: If I can turn one Dalek, I can turn them all. I can save the future.
GRETCHEN: Gretchen Alison Carlisle. Do something good and name it after me.
DOCTOR: I will do something amazing, I promise.
GRETCHEN: Damn well better.
(Gretchen primes her harpoon.)
JOURNEY: No, Gretchen.
(She fires two wires up to the cranial ledge.)
GRETCHEN: Go.
(Antibodies approach.)
CLARA: They're coming. They're coming.
(Journey fastens a pulley onto the zip wire.)
JOURNEY: Grab hold of the rope. Don't look down.
GRETCHEN: Good luck.
(Journey and Clara fly upwards. The Doctor leaves, and Gretchen shoots at the antibodies until she is killed, screaming.)

[Tea rooms]

(And stops screaming when she realises she is still breathing and sitting down. Gretchen looks at the Edwardian lady seated across the tea table by the French windows.)
MISSY: Hello. I'm Missy. Welcome to heaven. Would you like some tea? Little splosh? Lovely.

{Aristotle]

MORGAN: Fire!
DALEK: Exterminate. Advance. Seek, locate, destroy.
DALEK 2: Seek, locate, destroy.
DALEK 3: Exterminate.
(A Dalek goes KaBOOM!)
DALEK: Advance. Seek, locate.
DALEK 2: Exterminate. Exterminate.

[Organic compartment]

DOCTOR: Well, Rusty, here we are. Eye to eye.
RUSTY: You cannot save the humans. They will be exterminated.

[Lab 01]

RUSTY: I shall join the Dalek units in the final attack.

[Cranial ledge]

JOURNEY: So what do we do?
CLARA: Er, a clever thing, quickly. Think, think, think, think, think. Some of the lights are out.
JOURNEY: Yeah, we've got a damaged Dalek. You want to complain to someone?
CLARA: But it's not damaged, look at them.
JOURNEY: So?
CLARA: So, the Doctor said this was a memory bank and some of the memories were suppressed. What if. What if the dark spots are hidden memories? What if one of those is the Dalek seeing a star?
JOURNEY: Seriously?
CLARA: Yeah. Well, maybe. It's either that or the bulbs need changing.
JOURNEY: It really could be the bulbs.
CLARA: Got a better idea?
JOURNEY: Really wish I had.
CLARA: Yep, me too. Ah-ha.
(She pulls one of the panels off.)
CLARA: Watch out for antibodies. Let's see if there's an on switch.
(Clara goes behind, into the memory banks.)

[Organic compartment]

DOCTOR: I saved your life, Rusty. Now I'm going to go one better. I'm going to save your soul.
RUSTY: Daleks do not have souls.
DOCTOR: Oh, no? Imagine if you did. What then, Rusty? What would happen then?

[Cortex vault]

CLARA: I'm in the cortex.

[Cranial ledge]

JOURNEY: If there's a pack of spare bulbs, break it to me gently.
(Clara hits a dark panel and there is a flash. Some lights come on. The Doctor sees the flash travel down neurones to Rusty. Images of dying soldiers are on the screens.)

[Organic compartment]

DOCTOR: Your memories. I'm about to give some back to you.

[Cranial ledge]

JOURNEY: Are you okay? Clara?

[Cortex vault]

CLARA: Yeah. I think there was some sort of energy charge.

[Cranial ledge]

JOURNEY: You got the first lights on.

[Cortex vault]

CLARA: Of course, it's a brain. Brains work with electrical pathways linking up memories. It's working. It's working, we're turning the memories back on.
(She continues to crawl over flexible tubing.)

[Organic compartment]

DOCTOR: See, all those years ago, when I began
(The Doctor is using his sonic screwdriver to cut through the flexible tubing covering a set of neurones, then pulls them apart.)
DOCTOR: I was just running. I called myself the Doctor, but it was just a name. And then I went to Skaro. And then I met you lot and I understood who I was. The Doctor was not the Daleks.

[Aristotle]

DALEKS: Exterminate.
MORGAN: Fall back. Follow me. Fall back.
DALEKS: Exterminate. Exterminate. Exterminate.

[Cranial ledge]

(Antibodies are rising up through Rusty's body.)
JOURNEY: You'd better get a move on, There's company coming.

[Aristotle]

(Soldiers continue to die as Daleks close in from all corridors.)
DALEKS: Exterminate. Exterminate.
MORGAN: Fall back, fall back.
DALEKS: Exterminate. Exterminate.
(The soldiers seal a bulkhead door.)

[Cranial ledge]

(Journey starts shooting at antibodies.)
JOURNEY: Hurry up!

[Cortex vault]

CLARA: Show me a star, Rusty.
(More lights come back on.)

[Organic compartment]

(Impulses flow down the cables to Rusty. These images are of Daleks flying in space, attacking the Valiant in Stolen Earth.)
DOCTOR: Oh, look. It's your memories again. It's like somebody's mucking about up there. Memories, all those memories. Do you remember the star you saw being born?

[Cortex vault]

CLARA: Almost done. One more to go.

[Cranial ledge]

JOURNEY: Hurry up, Clara! Hurry up.
(The last set of lights come on, and Rusty's eyepiece goes dark. The antibodies retreat.)
JOURNEY: Clara, you did it. It's rebooting.

[Cortex vault]

JOURNEY [OC]: The antibodies have reset.

[Organic compartment]

RUSTY: I, I remember.
DOCTOR: You saw the truth, Rusty. Remember how you felt. You saw a star being born. The endless rebirth of the universe.
RUSTY: No.
DOCTOR: And you realised the truth about the Daleks

[Aristotle]

(Rusty is spinning around.)
RUSTY: Truth? What is the truth?

[Organic compartment]

DOCTOR: Let me show you the truth. I've opened your mind and now I'm coming in.

[Aristotle]

(The Daleks are starting to burn through the bulkhead door.)
MORGAN: That door is never going to hold. But I'm damned if I'm going to make it easy for them.

[Rusty's mind]

(The Doctor splices the two pieces of cut neurone together with his bare hands, and screams as the energy surges through his body.)
DOCTOR: I'm part of you. My mind is in your mind. 

[Lab 01]

RUSTY: I see your mind, Doctor. I see your universe.

[Rusty's mind]

DOCTOR: And isn't the universe beautiful?
RUSTY [OC]: I see beauty.
DOCTOR: Yes, that's good. That is good. Hold on to that.
RUSTY [OC]: I see endless, divine perfection.
DOCTOR: Make it a part of you. Remember how you feel right now. Put it inside you and live by it.
RUSTY [OC]: I see into your soul, Doctor. I see beauty. I see divinity. I see hatred.
DOCTOR: Hatred? 

[Lab 01]

RUSTY: I see your hatred of the Daleks and it is good.

[Rusty's mind]

(Behind the Doctor, the Crucible explodes.)
DOCTOR: No, no, no. You must see more than that, there must be more than that.

[Lab 01]

RUSTY: Death to the Daleks.

[Rusty's mind]

RUSTY [OC]: Death to the Daleks. Death to the Daleks.
DOCTOR: No, there must be more than that. There must be more than that. Please.

[Aristotle]

RUSTY: Daleks are evil. Daleks must be exterminated. Daleks are evil.
(Rusty approaches his former comrades from the rear, while Morgan and his surviving soldiers prepare for them to break through the bulkhead door.)
MORGAN: God save us all.
RUSTY: Daleks must be exterminated.
(The Daleks turn and Rusty shoots them to pieces.)
RUSTY: Exterminate.
DALEK: Under attack from a Dalek!
(KaBOOMs all round!)
RUSTY: The Daleks are exterminated

[Rusty's mind]

DOCTOR: Of course they are. That's what you do, isn't it?

[Aristotle]

(The humans have left Rusty and are normal size again.)
MORGAN: Journey.
JOURNEY: Uncle Morgan.
RUSTY: I have transmitted a retreat signal. The Daleks will believe the humans have initiated the ship's self-destruct.
(Journey briefly hugs Morgan.)
CLARA: What about you, Rusty?
RUSTY: I must go with them.
DOCTOR: Of course you must. You've unfinished work, haven't you?
RUSTY: Victory is yours, but it does not please you.
DOCTOR: You looked inside me and you saw hatred. That's not victory. Victory would have been a good Dalek.
RUSTY: I am not a good Dalek. You are a good Dalek.
(Rusty turns to leave, then looks back at the Doctor.)
DOCTOR: Till the next time.
(The Doctor goes through the door to Med Sec 07.)
JOURNEY: Is he leaving? Isn't he going to say goodbye?
CLARA: I think that was it. Yep, that was it. Sorry, got to run.
(Clara goes after the Doctor. Rusty leaves.)
JOURNEY: I'm sorry.
(Journey kisses Morgan on the cheek and follows Clara.)
MORGAN: Sorry?

[Med Sec 07]

JOURNEY: Doctor. Take me with you.
DOCTOR: I think you're probably nice. Underneath it all, I think you're kind and you're definitely brave. I just wish you hadn't been a soldier.
(Journey and Clara exchange final sheepish smiles before Clara follows the Doctor into the Tardis. The Dalek Saucer leaves the asteroid belt.)

[Tardis]

(Clara runs up the stairs in new clothes. The Tardis is in flight.)
CLARA: How do I look?
DOCTOR: Sort of short and round-ish, but with a good personality, which is the main thing.
CLARA: I meant my clothes. I just changed.
DOCTOR: Oh, good for you, still making an effort.
(The Tardis lands.)
DOCTOR: Okay, right, you're back in your cupboard, thirty seconds after you left.
CLARA: When will I see you again?
DOCTOR: Oh. Soon, I expect. Or later. One of those.
(Clara opens the door.)
CLARA: I don't know.
DOCTOR: I'm sorry?
CLARA: You asked me if you're a good man and the answer is, I don't know. But I think you try to be and I think that's probably the point.
DOCTOR: I think you're probably an amazing teacher.
CLARA: I think I'd better be.

[Corridor]

(Clara comes out of the supply cupboard.)
DANNY: Ah, hey.
CLARA: Hey, Danny.
DANNY: Have you changed your clothes?
CLARA: Yes. Yes, I, I have. Well noticed.
DANNY: Okay, good.
CLARA: Yes, good. Very good. Good work. You passed the test.
DANNY: Are you really going to go for a drink with me?
CLARA: Yeah, course I am. Why wouldn't I?
DANNY: I just thought
CLARA: Thought what?
DANNY: I thought you might have a rule against soldiers.
CLARA: No. No, not at all.
(They go different ways.)
CLARA: Not me.

[Tardis]

(The Doctor is doing Gallifreyan maths on a blackboard up on the gallery, near his bookcase. Clara is down by the console, swivelling in his easy chair.)
DOCTOR: Take a punt.
CLARA: Right.
DOCTOR: Your choice. Wherever, whenever, anywhere in time and space.
CLARA: Well, there is something, someone that I've always wanted to meet. But I know what you'll say.
DOCTOR: Try me.
CLARA: You'll say he's made up, that there is no such thing.
DOCTOR: Go on.
CLARA: It's. It's Robin Hood.
DOCTOR: Robin Hood.
(Clara goes up to the gallery.)
CLARA: Yeah. I love that story. I've always loved it, ever since I was little.
DOCTOR: Robin Hood, the heroic outlaw, who robs from the rich and gives to the poor.
CLARA: Yeah.
DOCTOR: He's made up. There's no such thing.
CLARA: Ah, you see?
(The Doctor takes a book from the bookcase.)
DOCTOR: Old-fashioned heroes only exist in old-fashioned story books, Clara.
CLARA: And what about you?
DOCTOR: Me?
CLARA: Yeah, you. You stop bad things happening every minute of every day. That sounds pretty heroic to me.
(The Doctor licks something from a large metal spoon. Custard?)
DOCTOR: Just passing the time. Hey, what about Mars?
CLARA: What?!
DOCTOR: The Ice Warrior Hives.
CLARA: You said it was my choice.
DOCTOR: Or the Tumescent Arrows of the Half-Light. Those girls can hold their drink.
CLARA: Doctor.
DOCTOR: And fracture fifteen different levels of reality simultaneously. I think I've got a Polaroid somewhere.
CLARA: Doctor! My choice. Robin Hood. Show me.
(They go down to the console.)
DOCTOR: Very well.
(He sets the coordinates.)
DOCTOR: Earth. England. Sherwood Forest. 1190AD. Ish. But you'll only be disappointed.
(He sets the Tardis flying. Meanwhile, the first Doctor is meeting Richard the Lionheart at the Crusades.)

[By a stream]

(The birds are singing, and a long tree trunk has been placed across the stream to act as a bridge. The Tardis materialises slightly up the slope and the Doctor steps out.)
DOCTOR: No damsels in distress, no pretty castles, no such thing as Robin Hood.
(An arrow slams into the Tardis next to him. A figure in dressed in Lincoln Green pops up from behind a tree trunk on the other side of the stream.)
ROBIN: You called? (and winks.) Very, very nicely done with the box, sir. I saw a Turk perform something very similar at Nottingham Fayre.
(The Doctor pulls the arrow out, and the hole vanishes.)
ROBIN: It's a trick with mirrors, no doubt?
DOCTOR: A trick?
ROBIN: A good jest. Ha, ha!
DOCTOR: This is not a trick. This is a Tardis.
ROBIN: Whatever it is, you bony rascal, I'm afraid I must relieve you of it.
DOCTOR: It's my property, that's what it is.
ROBIN: Well, don't you know all property is theft to Robin Hood?
(Robin stands in the middle of the 'bridge' without his bow and arrows.)
DOCTOR: You're not serious.
ROBIN: I'm many things, sir, but I'm never that. Robin Hood laughs in the face of all. Ha, ha, ha.
DOCTOR: And do people ever punch you in the face when you do that?
ROBIN: Not as yet.
DOCTOR: Lucky I'm here then, isn't it?
(Clara comes out of the Tardis, dressed in a red medieval-style dress, with long cut-away sleeves and a thin girdle around her hips. There is also a silver rope across her forehead that stays in place as if glued there.)
CLARA: Might be a little bit much, but what do you reckon, Doctor?
ROBIN: By all the saints. Are there any more in there?
CLARA: Is that?
DOCTOR: No.
CLARA: Oh, my God. Oh, my God! It is, isn't it? You found him. You actually found Robin Hood.
(Clara goes very girlish and giggly.)
DOCTOR: That is not Robin Hood.
ROBIN: Well then, who, sir, is about to relieve you of your magic box?
(Robin draws his long sword. The Doctor walks onto the bridge.)
DOCTOR: Nobody, sir. Not in this universe or the next.
ROBIN: Well then, draw your sword and prove your words.
DOCTOR: I have no sword. I don't need a sword.
(The Doctor opens his coat and turns to prove it.)
DOCTOR: Because I am the Doctor.
(He dons a gauntlet.)
DOCTOR: And this is my spoon. En garde!
(They trade thrusts and parries. The spoon stands up to the sword very well. The Doctor hits Robin on the back of the neck as he passes him.)
ROBIN: Ow!
CLARA: You're amazing.
DOCTOR: I've had some experience. Richard the Lionheart. Cyrano de Bergerac. Errol Flynn. He had the most enormous
CLARA: Ahem.
DOCTOR: Ego.
CLARA: Takes one to know one.
(The Doctor slaps Robin's backside.)
ROBIN: Oh, you.
(And retaliates by cutting a button off the Doctor's coat. So the Doctor holds his arms wide open and Robin lunges with his sword. The Doctor deflects it and does a little turn so that he and Robin are back to back on the trunk. Then he sticks out his bottom and pushes Robin into the water. Splash!)
CLARA: Doctor!
(The Doctor polishes his spoon.)
DOCTOR: Like I said. My box.
CLARA: Doctor?
(They look into the water. Robin is not visible. Because he pops up behind the Doctor and pushes him into the water. Clara and Robin laugh.)

[Settlement]

(A few thatched wattle-and-daub buildings, and a Celtic cross on a plinth. Knights in full armour are making the chickens scatter. A young woman is being dragged away chained to yoke across her shoulders. An old man runs up.)
QUAYLE: In the name of all that's holy, take our money, take our treasure, but spare my ward.
QUAYLES WARD: Do not fuss. All will be well.
QUAYLE: This is the Sheriff's doing. If he were here now, I'd tear out his black heart!
(A figure back-lit sitting on a horse speaks.)
SHERIFF: Would you now?
(He dismounts.)
SHERIFF: Or are you as milk-livered as your name suggests, Master Quayle?
QUAYLE: Take me. Spare this dear child.
SHERIFF: Take you? A lardy lack-wit like you? It's labour we require up at the castle. Labour and gold. Not old men and their worthless baubles. This will be a great help, Master Quayle, believe me. Newcomer to Sherwood, are we?
QUAYLES WARD: Yes, my Lord.
SHERIFF: You may also prove useful. Bring her.
QUAYLE: Your days are numbered, you cur.
(Quayle spits in the Sheriff's face.)
SHERIFF: You shall live to regret that. Actually, no. You won't.
(The Sheriff stabs Quayle in the stomach.)
QUAYLES WARD:  No! No!

[Outlaw's hideaway]

(In a narrow gullly.The outlaws live in shallow caves under the treeline. Robin is making me think of a subdued Lord Flashheart from Blackadder 2, with Clara as Bob.)
ROBIN: Let me introduce you to my men. This is Will Scarlet. He is a cheeky rogue with a good sword arm and a slippery tongue.
WILL: My lady.
(The Doctor pulls some of his hair out as he bows, and scans it with the sonic screwdriver.)
WILL: Argh! What do you want with my hair?
DOCTOR: Well, it's realistic, I'll give you that.
ROBIN: And this is Friar Tuck. Aptly named for the amount of grub he tucks into.
TUCK: You skinny blackguard.
(These men laugh a lot. As he steps forward, he nearly falls.)
TUCK: What are you doing?
(The Doctor stands up with one of his sandals)
DOCTOR: This isn't a real sandal.
TUCK: Yes, it is.
DOCTOR: (sniffs) Oh. Yes, it is.
ROBIN: This, er, is Alan-a-Dale. He's a master of the lute, whose music brightens up these dark days.
ALAN: (sings) Stranger you are welcome here, in Sherwood's bonny glade. Ow!
(The Doctor has jabbed his arm with a hypodermic gizmo.)
DOCTOR: Sorry, sorry, sorry. Blood analysis. Oh. All those diseases. If you were real, you'd be dead in six months.
ALAN: I am real.
DOCTOR: Bye.
ROBIN: And this is John Little. Called Little John. He's my loyal companion in many an adventure.
(The man mountain steps aside and a small man jumps forward, to general merriment.)
CLARA: Oh!
WILL: Works every time.
CLARA: Oh, I cannot believe this. You, you really are Robin Hood and his Merry Men.
ROBIN: Aye! That is an apt description. What say you, lads?
ALL: Aye!
DOCTOR: Stop laughing. Why are you always doing that? Are you all simple or something? I'm going to need a sample.
(The Doctor picks up a goblet and throws away the contents before walking up to Robin..)
ROBIN: Of what?
CLARA: Ahem. Excuse me. Sorry. What are you doing?
DOCTOR: Well, they're not holograms, that much is obvious. Could be a theme park from the future. Or we might be inside a miniscope.
(As in Carnival of Monsters)
CLARA: Oh, shut up.
DOCTOR: A miniscope. Yes, of course. Why not?
ROBIN: Your friend seems not quite of the real world.
CLARA: No. No, he's not really. Not most of the time. Dark days?
ROBIN: My lady?
CLARA: You said that these were dark days. What did you mean?
WILL: King Richard is away on crusade, my lady. His tyrant of a brother rules instead.
CLARA: And the Sheriff. Cos there is a sheriff, right?
ALAN: Aye. It is indeed this jackal of the princes who seeks to oppress us for ever more.
DOCTOR: Or six months in your case.
ROBIN: It is a shame to dwell on murky thoughts when there is such beauty here.
CLARA: Why are you so sad?
ROBIN: Why do you think me sad?
CLARA: Because the Doctor's right, you laugh too much.
ROBIN: You know, I do not live this outlaw life by choice. You see before you Robert.
BOTH: Earl of Loxley.
CLARA: Yes.
ROBIN: Yes.
CLARA: Sorry. Do go on.
ROBIN: I er, I had my lands and titles stripped from me. I dared to speak out against Prince John. But I lost the thing most dear to me.
CLARA: What was she called?
ROBIN: You're so very quick. How does the Doctor stand it?
CLARA: Marian?
ROBIN: You know her?
CLARA: Oh, yes. I have always known her.
ROBIN: It was Marian who told me that I must stand up and be counted. But, I was afraid. Now this green canopy is my palace and the rough ground my feather bed. Maybe one day I will return home, but until that day. Until that day, it is beholden on me to be the man Marian wanted, to be a hero for those this tyrant sheriff slaughters.
DOCTOR: What time is it, Mister Hood?
ROBIN: Somewhat after noon.
DOCTOR: No, no. Time of year? What season?
ROBIN: Oh, Dame Autumn has draped her mellow skirts about the forest, Doctor. The time of mists and harvest approaches.
DOCTOR: Yeah, yeah. All very poetic. But it's very green hereabouts, though, isn't it? Like I said, very sunny.
CLARA: So?
DOCTOR: Have you been to Nottingham?
CLARA: Climate change?
DOCTOR: It's 1190.
ROBIN: You must excuse me. The Sheriff has issued a proclamation and tomorrow there is to be a contest to find the best archer in the land. And the bounty, it's an arrow made of pure gold.
CLARA: No! Don't, don't go. It's a trap.
ROBIN: Well, of course it is! But a contest to find the best archer in the land? There is no contest.
(General hilarity.)
DOCTOR: Right, that isn't even funny. That was bantering. I am totally against bantering.
CLARA: How can you be so sure he is not the real thing?
DOCTOR: Because he can't be.
CLARA: When did you stop believing in everything?
DOCTOR: When did you start believing in impossible heroes?
CLARA: Don't you know? In a way, it's rather sweet.
(The Doctor bites into an apple then scans it with his screwdriver.)

[Archery ground]

(We are shown Caerphilly Castle with its artificial lakes, which was built from 1268 onwards. Nottingham Castle is built on castle rock by the river with the city around it. The contest is taking place in the central ward.)
HERALD: In the contest for the golden arrow, after ten rounds, the battle is betwixt our Lord Sheriff
(Obligatory cheers from the crowd.)
HERALD: And the stranger known as Tom the Tinker.
(Robin in a wide-brimmed leather hat gets a rousing reception.)
SHERIFF: Perhaps not such a stranger after all.
HERALD: Take your places.
ROBIN: Shall we make the contest a little more interesting, my Lord? The targets seem a little close. What say you? Another twenty paces?
SHERIFF: Why not?
(The central target is moved back. The Sheriff fires his black arrow into the middle of the bulls-eye.)
SHERIFF: Now, Tinker. Let us see thy true face.
(Robin's white-fletched arrow splits the Sheriff's.)
HERALD: Ye Gads! He has split the arrow! Truly, he is the finest archer in all England. Come forward, Tinker. And claim your prize.
(But before Robin can take the prize, an arrow with multicoloured feathers splits his own. It is the Doctor's.)
LITTLE JOHN: He's full of surprises, isn't he?
DOCTOR: I'm the Doctor. My skills as a bowman speak for themselves. I claim my reward.
(The Herald kneels and the Doctor takes the prize.)
DOCTOR: A mere bauble.
(He throws it away in the general direction of the Merry Men.)
DOCTOR: I want something else.
SHERIFF: Name it.
DOCTOR: Enlightenment.
(Robin splits the Doctor's arrow. The crowd roars. The Doctor's next arrow ricochets off a guard's armour to split Robin's. Robin retaliates by not even looking when he looses his missile.)
DOCTOR: This is getting silly.
(The Doctor points his sonic screwdriver at the target, and it explodes in a ball of flame.)
SHERIFF: Fascinating. Seize him!
(The three knights draw their swords. Clara takes what looks like an anachronistic halberd from a rack and tries to swing it. It is too heavy for her.)
DOCTOR: What are you doing? Put that down.
CLARA: I'm fine. I take Year Seven for after school Tae Kwon Do.
ROBIN: Don't worry, Doctor. I'll save you.
DOCTOR: I don't need saving.
ROBIN: Your honour is safe.
DOCTOR: I know.
ROBIN: For I am Robin.
(He removes his hat and every one cheers.)
ROBIN: Robin Hood!
(Robin severs one of the knights' arms. It falls to the ground and sparks a bit.)
VOICE [OC]: Witchery! Witchery!
(The Doctor picks the arm up.)
DOCTOR: Robot.
(The knight's visor opens to reveal a metal face. A violet light shines in a cross pattern from between its eyebrows.)
DOCTOR: Now we're getting somewhere.
SHERIFF: Take them. Kill the rest. Kill them all!
(The robot knights fire energy bolts from their foreheads.)
DOCTOR: He surrenders!
ROBIN: What?
DOCTOR: Hai!
(The Doctor uses Venusian aikido to knock Robin's sword out of his hand.)
ROBIN: You miserable cur. I had them on the run. Flee, lads, flee! Live to fight another day!
TUCK: Come on!
(The Merry Men run for their lives.)
SHERIFF: To the dungeons with all of them.
CLARA: What are you up to?
DOCTOR: Quickest way to find out anybody's plans, get yourself captured.

[Castle]

(Somewhere with little lighting and a high roof. There are screams somewhere and a giant bubbling crucible. A man carrying a bucket collapses on the floor.)
QUAYLES WARD: Here, let me help you.
WALTER: Thank you, Lady.
(A knight looks at them, visor open.)
QUAYLES WARD: What are you? Gargoyle, what are you?
KNIGHT: Leave it.
QUAYLES WARD: He only needs to rest. We all need to rest.
KNIGHT: Analysis shows that peasant creature is spent.
QUAYLES WARD: No. No, please.
KNIGHT: Usefulness expired.
WALTER: No. No! No!
(A violet energy beam turns him into a smoking pile of rags.)
QUAYLES WARD: Damn you! Damn you and that villain the Sheriff!

[Dungeon]

(A skeleton is sitting up against a stake fastened into the floor of the stone chamber. A single cross slit illuminates the room. Our three heros chained together, with the chains running through large hoops set into stones in the floor. Robin is on the left as we look at them, then the Doctor, then Clara..)
ROBIN: Splendid. Enchained.
CLARA: Yep.
ROBIN: Trussed up like turkey-cocks. Thanks to your friend.
DOCTOR: Shut it, Hoodie. I saved your life.
ROBIN: I had the situation well in hand.
DOCTOR: Long-haired ninny versus robot killer knights? I know where I'd put my money.
ROBIN: If you had not betrayed me, I would have been triumphant.
DOCTOR: You would have been a little puff of smoke and ashes.
ROBIN: Oh, ha!
DOCTOR: You'd have been floating around in tiny little laughing bits in people's goblets.
ROBIN: Balderdash. Ha!
DOCTOR: Oh, right, here we go. It's laughing time.
ROBIN: Well, you amuse me, grey old man.
DOCTOR: Guard! He's laughing again! You can't keep me locked up with a laughing person.
ROBIN: Oh, I find that, I find that quite funny. Do you know, I feel another laugh coming on. A-ha-ha-ha!
DOCTOR: Guards, I cannot remain in this cell. Execute me now.
ROBIN: You heard him. Execute the old fool.
DOCTOR: No, hang on. Execute him.
ROBIN: I do not fear death, so execute away.
DOCTOR: Execute him. I'd like to see if his head keeps laughing when you chop it off!
ROBIN: Oh, Robin Hood always laughs in the face of death.
DOCTOR: Yes, rolling around the floor laughing, I would pay good money to see that.
DOCTOR + ROBIN: Guard! Guard! Guard! Guard! Guard! Guard!
CLARA: Oh, you two, shut up! Do either of you understand, in any way at all, that there isn't actually a guard out there?
DOCTOR: Oh.
ROBIN: I did, in fact.
DOCTOR: No, you didn't.
CLARA: I said, shut up. The Doctor and Robin Hood locked up in a cellar. Is this seriously the best that you can do? You're determined to starve to death in here squabbling.
ROBIN: Well, I'll tell you one thing. I'd last a lot longer than this desiccated man-crone.
DOCTOR: Really?
ROBIN: Really.
DOCTOR: Well, you know what? I think you'll find I have a certain genetic advantage. Oh!
(Clara has yanked on the chain attached to his wrist.)
CLARA: It is not a competition about who can die slower.
DOCTOR: It would definitely be me, though, wouldn't it?
CLARA: There was supposed to be a plan. Do either of you two have a plan?
DOCTOR: Yeah, of course I have a plan.
ROBIN: I too have a plan.
CLARA: Okay. Robin, you first.
DOCTOR: Why him?
CLARA: Doctor, shut up. Robin, your plan.
ROBIN: I am biding my time.
CLARA: Thank you, Prince of Thieves. Last of the Time Lords?
DOCTOR: Yes, I have a plan.
CLARA: Can you explain your plan without using the word sonic screwdriver? Because you might have forgotten the Sheriff of Nottingham has taken your sonic screwdriver, just saying. It's always the screwdriver.
DOCTOR: Okay, let, let, let, let's hear Robin's plan first.
CLARA: Oh, for God's sake.
(The door is unlocked.)
ROBIN: See? There was a guard. There was guard listening the whole time, I knew it. Ha-ha-ha-ha-ha!
(The guard is a man with no teeth left, just rotted stumps.)
GUARD: The Sheriff himself commanded me to listen, to find out which of you is the true ringleader.
DOCTOR: Ah, so he can do the interrogating. Very wise.
ROBIN: Excellent. He will get nothing from me.
DOCTOR: No, no, no, no. no. He will get nothing from me, because interrogation, that's where I always turn the tables. You see, that's my plan.
ROBIN: Just hurry up and take me to him.
DOCTOR: No, no, chop-chop, come on.
(The guard unfastens Clara's chains.)
CLARA: Seriously.
GUARD: Come on. 
DOCTOR: No.
ROBIN: What are you doing?
DOCTOR: Don't be ridiculous!
(The door slams shut and is locked.)

[Outlaw's hideaway]

(Night. Little John is holding the golden arrow. It goes from speaker to speaker.)
LITTLE JOHN: 'Tis a thing of beauty indeed.
WILL: And will feed a family for a twelvemonth when melted down.
TUCK: Tonight we rest. Tomorrow we must draw up plans to rescue Robin. We shall soon see how those Mechanicals feel about the taste of Nottingham steel. Lord, forgive me.
ALAN: Strange, though, is it not?
LITTLE JOHN: What?
ALAN: All this looting that the Sheriff is doing, and yet 'tis only ever gold that he takes. Pearls, rubies, all the precious jewels of the realm seem no consequence to him. Only gold.
(He hands the arrow to Tuck and picks up his lute.)
ALAN: (sings) Poor Robin and the stranger lay, In the dungeon all the live-long day. The Merry Men might pine away, Upon a Sherwood morning.
(Back at the castle, we watch artefacts dropping into a giant crucible. One of the knights opens the gate at the bottom and the molten metal pours out into an intricate mould, like a giant printed circuit.)

[Sheriff's room]

SHERIFF: Eat, my Lady, eat. Let it not be said that the Sheriff of Nottingham is a poor host.
(Clara is at the other end of the well-stocked table)
CLARA: I had a bag of crisps this morning, thanks.
SHERIFF: Your words are strange, fair one.
CLARA: Mmm, I should think they are.
SHERIFF: But I like you. You're refreshingly direct.
CLARA: You can take the girl out of Blackpool.
(The Sheriff holds up something oblong wrapped in cling film. Sandwiches? Then the spoon.)
SHERIFF: Taken from your friend's strange tunic. An intriguing gallimaufry. Including this wand. Evidently a thing of awesome power. Tell me, are you from beyond the stars?
CLARA: You're the one with the robot army, you tell me.

[Dungeon]

DOCTOR: I'm sorry?
ROBIN: No. Beat your breast. Moan. Groan as though twenty devils possessed your guts.
DOCTOR: What for?
ROBIN: So as to attract the attention of that gargoyle-faced guard.
DOCTOR: It's your plan. You moan.
ROBIN: No, no. No, it won't work.
DOCTOR: Why?
ROBIN: Oh, because you're clearly more advanced in years and you have a sickly aspect to you.
DOCTOR: I have a what?
ROBIN: You're as pale as milk. It's the way with Scots. They're strangers to vegetables.
DOCTOR: I'm not moaning. You moan.
ROBIN: Fine. If you want something doing. (moans loudly.) Can I rely upon you to do the rest?
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, I know the drill.
(The guard speaks through the grill in the door.)
GUARD: What is this din?
DOCTOR: No business of yours, cur.  (to Robin) Speak up. I can't hear you.
GUARD: What ails him?
DOCTOR: None of your business.
(The guard enters.)
GUARD: I said, what ails him?
DOCTOR: Well, if you must know, he's having a nervous breakdown.
GUARD: A what?
DOCTOR: He's like this whenever he's in any kind of danger. He just can't seem to cope. He gets so afraid. He goes into a kind of fit. I honestly believe that he may die of sheer fright, like some tiny, shivering little mouse. Oh, God, I think he's soiled himself.
GUARD: Let him die. It will save us the trouble of executing him.
DOCTOR: And what will happen to the reward?
GUARD: Reward?
DOCTOR: Oh, God, I shouldn't have said that.
GUARD: Tell me!
DOCTOR: He carries a vital message. The Prince has promised a bounty.
GUARD: A big one? 
DOCTOR: An enormous one.
(Robin mumbles. The guard leans close to him.)
GUARD:  What's that? Say again?
ROBIN: Come closer. Your breath stinks like a serpent, has anyone ever told you that?
(Robin gives the guard a Glasgow kiss. That is, he head-butts him, knocking him out cold.)
ROBIN: Soiled myself?
DOCTOR: Did you? That's getting into character. Okay, keys.
ROBIN: I'll get them.
DOCTOR: No, no. I'll get them.
ROBIN: I'll get them. I'll get them.
DOCTOR: I'm fine, no, no worries. I've got them!
ROBIN: I've got them! I'll get
(The two pairs of competing feet end up kicking the guard's keys down the drain. Splosh.)
DOCTOR: Well, there is a bright side.
ROBIN: Which is?
DOCTOR: Clara didn't see that. 

[Sheriff's room]

SHERIFF: But enough of tawdry matters. Let us talk of softer, sweeter things.
(He uses his dagger to spear a sweetmeat.)
CLARA: Ah. Good, yes, I was hoping we'd get round to that.
SHERIFF: You were?
CLARA: Mmm. For I have known I was destined to draw the eye of a great and powerful man for a long time. Ever since I saw those mysterious lights in the sky.
SHERIFF: You saw them too?
CLARA: And those strange mechanical men, with their promises.
SHERIFF: I too have experienced this.
CLARA: Really? Well, I would never have guessed. Tell me your story.
SHERIFF: Tell me yours.
CLARA: Oh, no, no, no, no. But you have to go first.
SHERIFF: Why so?
CLARA: Because great men always precede.
SHERIFF: You have a point.
CLARA: Your story, then.
SHERIFF: Once upon a time, there was a brave and clever and handsome man.
CLARA:  I can almost picture him. I don't even have to close my eyes.
SHERIFF: Unappreciated by his royal master.
CLARA: Prince John?
SHERIFF: The very same.
CLARA: Then came the lights in the sky, and everything changed.
SHERIFF: The skyship came to Earth in a fury of fire.
CLARA: I'd almost call it a crash. I remember it well.
SHERIFF: A craft from the heavenly spheres, bedight with twinkling lights and miracles beyond imagining. The most beautiful thing the brave and handsome man had ever seen.
CLARA: And I suppose the mechanical men saw you as their natural leader?
SHERIFF: It was I and I alone to whom the mechanical men then imparted their secrets. Shortly, I shall be the most powerful man in the realm. King in all but name, for Nottingham is not enough.
CLARA: It isn't?
SHERIFF: After this, Derby.
CLARA: Right.
SHERIFF: Then Lincoln. And after Lincoln
CLARA: Worksop?
(The Sheriff stabs his dagger into the table.)
SHERIFF: The world! 

[Passageway]

(Robin is carrying the block with the loop their chains are running through.)
ROBIN: Now what?
DOCTOR: First, a blacksmith's forge.
ROBIN: So as to remove our chains?
DOCTOR: No. So I can knock up an ornamental plant stand. Of course it's so we can get rid of our chains. I don't want to be manacled to you all night.
(Robin laughs.)
DOCTOR: Oh, no. Please, don't do that.
ROBIN: Ornamental plant stand.
DOCTOR: It's not even that funny.
ROBIN: You're an amusing fellow, Doctor.
DOCTOR: Oh, don't. Can you just stop! You'll give yourself a hernia.

[Sheriff's room]

CLARA: So what are you hanging around here for, then, Your Majesty? Why are you bothering to squeeze pips out of peasants if you've got a skyship on stand-by?
SHERIFF: Enough questions. I'm impatient to hear your story.
CLARA: Oh, but I do not have one. I was lying.
SHERIFF: Lying?
CLARA: Yeah. People are so much better at sharing information if they think the other person has already got it.
SHERIFF: Oh, that's very clever.
CLARA: Thank you.
SHERIFF: You'll do very well.
CLARA: For what?
SHERIFF: Doesn't every king require a consort?
(The sheriff leans over Clara for a kiss, and she manages to duck out.)
CLARA: Right, you do that again and you'll regret that.

[Spaceship]

(The Doctor and Robin come up some steps free of their chains. The Doctor spots an interesting sight - a metal doorway. He goes through it. The area is long, spartan and metal with a glowing hemisphere on a console at the end.)
DOCTOR: At last. Something real. No more fairy tales.
ROBIN: What is this place?
DOCTOR: A spaceship. More twenty ninth century than twelfth. Data banks, data banks, data banks. Where was this ship headed?
(The computer screen gives all the details.)
DOCTOR: The Promised Land again. Like the Half-Faced Man, but more sophisticated. It disguised itself as a twelfth century castle.
(Graphic shows the spaceship landing pointy bit upwards and pretending to be the central keep.)
DOCTOR: It merges into the culture, tries to keep a low profile, so no one notices. That explains the robot knights. But the engines. The engines are damaged. They're leaking radiation into the local atmosphere, creating a temporary climate of staggering benevolence.
ROBIN: I beg pardon?
DOCTOR: I told you. It's too sunny. It's too green. And there is even an evil sheriff to oppress the locals. This explains everything, even you.
ROBIN: It does?
DOCTOR: Well, what does every oppressed peasant workforce need? The illusion of hope. Some silly story to get them through the day, lull them into docility, and keep them working. Ship's data banks. Full of every myth and legend you could hope for, including Robin Hood.
(The data bank displays various book illustrations and a photograph shows Robin Hood as played by Patrick Troughton.)
DOCTOR: Isn't it time you came clean with me? You're not real and you know it. Look at you. Perfect eyes, perfect teeth. Nobody has a jawline like that. You're as much a part of what is happening here as the Sheriff and his metal knights. You're a robot.
ROBIN: You dare to accuse me of collusion with that villain, the Sheriff?
DOCTOR: I dare.
ROBIN: You false-tongued knave. I should have skewered you when I had the chance.
DOCTOR: I would like to see you try.
(The metal door is blown inwards by lasers.)
DOCTOR: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
(The Sheriff enters with Clara and knights.)
SHERIFF: Surrender, outlaw.
DOCTOR: Very good.
SHERIFF: Kill him. Kill Robin Hood.
DOCTOR: You can drop all that stuff now, Sheriff.
CLARA: Doctor?
DOCTOR: He is not what you think he is. This is all play-acting.
CLARA: We can't just let them kill him!
DOCTOR: You're not fooling anyone, Sheriff.
(A blast from a knight knocks Robin off his feet. Clara gets between him and the attacker. Robin grabs her around the waist and they back up to a window.)
CLARA: What the hell are you doing?
ROBIN: Surviving.
CLARA: No!
(Robin falls backwards through the window, taking Clara with him.)
DOCTOR: No! Clara!
(Robin and Clara land in the moat. The full moon is reflected in the rippling water.)
SHERIFF: Yeah, sorry about the girl. Such a pretty thing. What a queen she would have made.
(The Sheriff turns away. The Doctor sees Robin climb out of the other side of the moat with Clara in his arms.)
DOCTOR: Stop pretending. You and your fancy robots. I get it. I understand.
SHERIFF: Oh, so you too know my plans?
DOCTOR: You and your robots plundering the surrounding countryside for all it's worth. Gold. Gold. Of course. Gold. You are creating a matrix of gold to repair the engine circuitry.
SHERIFF: This is the scheme the Mechanicals have devised. Soon this skyship will depart. Destination, London. There I will obliterate the King and take my rightful place as ruler of this sceptred isle.
DOCTOR: It won't work. There's not a chance. I've seen the instruments. There's been too much damage. You are stoking up a gigantic bomb!
SHERIFF: Shush.
(A knight knocks the Doctor out.)

[Castle]

KNIGHT [OC]: Engine capacity at forty eight percent.
(Knights carry a gold circuit board away. The Doctor wakes up.)
KNIGHT [OC]: Engine capacity at forty eight percent.
DOCTOR: It's not enough. That's not enough. It'll never make orbit.
(Amongst the wails and groans of downtrodden humanity there is a mechanical whumph!)
DOCTOR: That's the engines, building in power. Stupid, stupid Sheriff.
(He strains at the chains holding his wrists behind his back.)
DOCTOR: Argh! Go on, give! Give, you stupid things. What are you looking at?
(It is Quayle's ward.)

[Outlaw's hideout]

(Next morning, Clara wakes to the sight of Robin's face.)
CLARA: Hi.
ROBIN: The time for games is over.

[Castle]

QUAYLES WARD: I think I understand you. The Sheriff's using the gold to replace something.
DOCTOR: That's the principle. But he's a moron. If he tries to fly this ship, it'll explode and wipe out half the country. What we need is a little riot. Time to reflect on lasers and gold. Spread the word.
(Quayle's ward frees the Doctor's hands.)

[Outlaw's hideout]

ROBIN: You will tell me everything this Doctor knows about Robin Hood and his Merry Men.
CLARA: What is this? Why are you interrogating me?
ROBIN: And then, you will tell me exactly who this Doctor is and what are his plans.

[Castle]

KNIGHT: You are fit for labour. Stand aside while this peasant unit is freed.
DOCTOR: I'm afraid you're a little late.
KNIGHT: Explain.
DOCTOR: I'm already free!
(The knight powers up his violet beam. The Doctor reflects it with a golden plate and it hits the wall. Quayle's ward produces another plate and this time it is bounced straight back at the knight. It's head explodes. More knights come, but all the workers have plates for shields.)

[Sheriff's room]

(The Sheriff is annotating a map of England.)
SHERIFF: Mine, mine, mine.
KNIGHT: Engine capacity at seventy five percent.
(There is a beeping noise. The Sheriff pushes the papers aside to reveal a monitor in the wooden table. He watches the carnage that is taking place.)
SHERIFF: 'Ods blood! Who will rid me of this turbulent Doctor?
(He punches a knight. It hurts.)
SHERIFF: Come.

[Castle]

(People are screaming and dying, but so are the knights.)
DOCTOR: Everyone, the last one!
(It is surrounded by reflective surfaces. Its violet energy beam bounces around a lot until if finally returns to sender, multiplied several times. KaBOOM! Celebrations.)
DOCTOR: Out, out! Everyone, quickly, get out. Quickly!
QUAYLES WARD: You've saved us all, clever one.
(She kissees him on the cheek.)
QUAYLES WARD: Thank you.
KNIGHT: Engine capacity at eighty two percent.
SHERIFF: You are indeed an ingenious fellow, Doctor. But do you really think your peasants' revolt can stop me?
DOCTOR: I rather think you're the revolting one around here. I'm bantering. I'm bantering. Listen to me. You don't have enough gold content to seal the engine breach. If you try and take off, you'll wipe out half of England.
SHERIFF: Liar! From my sky vessel, I shall rule omnipotent.
DOCTOR: You pudding-headed primitive, shut down the engines. What you're doing will alter the course of history.
SHERIFF: I sincerely hope so, or I wouldn't be bothering.
(The Sheriff throws a knight's head into the crucible.)
DOCTOR: Listen to me. It doesn't have to end like this. Shut it all down, return Clara to me and I'll do what I can.
SHERIFF: I don't have Clara.
DOCTOR: Robin's one of yours.
SHERIFF: What did you say?
DOCTOR: He's one of your tin-headed puppets, just like these brutes here.
SHERIFF: Robin Hood is not one of mine.
DOCTOR: Of course he is. He's a robot, created by your mechanical mates.
SHERIFF: Why would they do that?
DOCTOR: To pacify the locals, give them false hope. He's the opiate of the masses.
SHERIFF: Why would we create an enemy to fight us? What sense would that make? That would be a terrible idea.
DOCTOR: Yes! Yes, it would. Wouldn't it? Yes, that would be a rubbish idea. Why would you do that? But he can't be. He's not real. He's a legend!
ROBIN: Too kind! And this legend does not come alone.
(Robin is up in the gallery.)
CLARA: Hiya!
(Robin sticks his dagger into a wall hanging and slides down with Clara holding on to him.)
ROBIN: You all right?
CLARA: Hell, yeah.
ROBIN: Good. My men have taken the castle.
SHERIFF: No!
ROBIN: Now I'm going to take you.
SHERIFF: This one's all mine.
(The two knights guarding the Sheriff are deactivated by the amulet hanging around his neck.)
SHERIFF: What do you say, outlaw? A final reckoning?
ROBIN: Oh, yes.
(Robin and the Sheriff prepare to sword-fight.)
DOCTOR: Are you okay?
CLARA: Fine, yeah.
DOCTOR: Good. We don't have long.
(The keep is rumbling and shaking.)
SHERIFF: I shall avenge every slight, outlaw.
CLARA: Doctor
DOCTOR: I know. The whole castle's about to blow.
SHERIFF: You have long been a thorn in my side.
ROBIN: Well, everyone should have a hobby. Mine's annoying you.
SHERIFF: I'll have you boiled in oil at the castle by sunset.
ROBIN: Can we make it a little earlier? Cos that's a little past my bedtime.
(Robin cuts a rope and flies on it up to a cross-beam.)
SHERIFF: I'm too much for you, outlaw. The first of a new breed. Half man, half engine.
(The Sheriff also does the rope thing and they continue the fight up on the beam.)
SHERIFF: Never ageing. Never tiring.
ROBIN: Are you still talking?
(The Sheriff cuts Robin's arm and he drops his sword. Then he opens his arms just like the Doctor did at the stream.)
SHERIFF: Bow down before your new king, you prince of knaves!
(The Sheriff comes at Robin, who turns so they are back to back then kicks the back of the Sheriff's knee.)
SHERIFF: Argh!
(The Sheriff falls into the crucible. Robin descends to the ground by rope again.)
ROBIN: Sorry. Was that, er, was that showing off?
CLARA: That was amazing.
(The castle shakes. Masonry starts to fall.)
DOCTOR: Run! Come on, run!
(We leave a pair of gold-covered hands sticking out of the crucible.)

[Castle grounds]

(From across the moat, we watch masonry fall and the spaceship take off.)
DOCTOR: It's never going to make it. Not enough gold. It'll never make it into orbit. Where is it? Where did it go?
CLARA: Where did what go?
DOCTOR: The golden arrow.
ROBIN: Tuck!
DOCTOR: You took it?
TUCK: Of course we did. We're robbers.
DOCTORY: I love you boys.
CLARA: Doctor, what are you suggesting?
DOCTOR: Golden arrow. It might just be enough gold content to get the ship into orbit and out of harm's way.
(The Doctor offers Robin the bow and arrow.)
ROBIN: No, it has to be you. My arm is injured.
(But the Doctor can't even get the arrow onto the bowstring.)
CLARA: You're good at this. I saw you. You won the tournament.
DOCTOR: I cheated. I made a special arrow with a homing device.
CLARA: Oh, brilliant. Right, let me have a go.
DOCTOR: You? You do Tae Kwon Do. That's not the same thing as this.
ROBIN: My friends. Surely we can manage it together?

[Spaceship]

KNIGHT: Engine capacity at eighty three percent. Insufficient power to achieve escape velocity.
(Sitting on the ground, the Doctor and Clara hold each end of the bow while Robin braces it with his foot. He pulls back the bowstring and releases the golden arrow. It hits the spaceship directly in the middle of a roundel on an engine.)
KNIGHT: Maximum power surge.
(The spaceship blasts into orbit.)
KNIGHT: Engines critical. Engines critical. Engines crit

[Castle grounds]

(KaBOOM! The watching crowd cheers.)
ALAN: (sings) One awful day in Nottingham, Brave Robin Hood was in a jam. The arrow flew it true
(His lute is snatched from him.)
WILL: Give it a rest, Alan.
ALAN: Give me my lute!
CLARA: Still not keen on the laughing thing?
DOCTOR: No, no, no, no.
(Clara laughs. Robin laughs.)

[By a stream]

(Robin gives Clara a very personal archery lesson.)
CLARA: Woo-hoo! I'm going to miss you. You're very naughty.
ROBIN: Oh, I know. Whoever he is, he is a very lucky man.
CLARA: Marian is very lucky, too.
ROBIN: I fear not.
CLARA: Don't give up. Not ever. Not for one single day.
(She kisses his cheek.)
CLARA: Be safe, if you can be. But always be amazing.
ROBIN: Hmm.
CLARA: Goodbye, Robin Hood.
ROBIN: Goodbye, Clara Oswald.
(Clara winks at him, then goes into the Tardis.)
ROBIN: So, is it true, Doctor?
DOCTOR: Is what true?
ROBIN: That in the future I am forgotten as a real man? I am but a legend?
DOCTOR: I'm afraid it is.
ROBIN: Hmm. Good. History is a burden. Stories can make us fly.
DOCTOR: I'm still having a little trouble believing yours, I'm afraid.
ROBIN: Is it so hard to credit? That a man born into wealth and privilege should find the plight of the oppressed and weak too much to bear...
DOCTOR: No.
ROBIN: Until one night he is moved to steal a Tardis? Fly among the stars, fighting the good fight. Clara told me your stories.
DOCTOR: She should not have told you any of that.
ROBIN: Well. Well, once the story started, she could hardly stop herself. You are her hero, I think.
DOCTOR: I'm not a hero.
ROBIN: Well, neither am I. But if we both keep pretending to be. Ha-ha! Perhaps others will be heroes in our name. Perhaps we will both be stories. And may those stories never end.
(They shake hands.)
ROBIN: Goodbye, Doctor, Time Lord of Gallifrey.
DOCTOR: Goodbye, Robin Hood, Earl of Loxley.
ROBIN: And remember, Doctor. I'm just as real as you are.

[Tardis]

CLARA: Admit it. You like him.
DOCTOR: Well, I'm leaving him a present, aren't I?

[By a stream]

((Robin looks at a woman's portrait in a locket around his neck, as the Tardis dematerialises to reveal that same young woman has been standing behind it.)
QUAYLES WARD: Robin? I've found you at last.
ROBIN: Marian?  Thank you. Thank you, Doctor!
(He fires an arrow in the air, it comes to rest I know not where.)
ROBIN: Ha-ha-ha!


(The Doctor is on a world tour. First we see him sitting on top of the Tardis above the Earth.)
DOCTOR: (sotto) Listen!

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: Question. Why do we talk out loud when we know we're alone? (blows out candle) Conjecture. Because we know we're not.
(He writes on his blackboard.)
DOCTOR: Evolution perfects survival skills. There are perfect hunters.
(He watches a lioness bring down a wildebeest.)
DOCTOR: There is perfect defence.
(A shoal of dazzling tuna, and a puffer fish inflates itself so the nasty spines stick out.)
DOCTOR: Question. Why is there no such thing as perfect hiding? Answer. How would you know? Logically, if evolution were to perfect a creature whose primary skill were to hide from view, how could you know it existed?
(He puts his chalk down in an open book.)
DOCTOR: It could be with us every second and we would never know. How would you detect it, even sense it, except in those moments when, for no clear reason you choose to speak aloud? What would such a creature want? What would it do? Well? What would you do?
(That last word echoes around the Tardis. The chalk is no longer where he left it. It rolls on the floor to his feet and he picks it up, then sees that what he wrote on the blackboard has been replaced by one word. Listen.)

[Restaurant]

(Clara has returned home, and is recalling the evening. We jump back to where she has been. Clara enters the restaurant and goes to the table where Danny Pink is sitting, wearing a pink shirt. He raises his right arm in a sort of open hand semi-salute.)
DANNY: Hey.
CLARA: Hey.
(She goes to shake his hand.)
CLARA: Sorry.
(They exchange kisses on the cheeks.)
CLARA: So the famous drink at last.
DANNY: Yeah. Took a bit of time, family stuff, but here we are.
CLARA: Dinner, in fact.
DANNY: Yeah, straight to dinner.
CLARA: I like a man who moves fast.
DANNY: Yeah? I might go straight for extras. Afters. Dessert.
CLARA: Yes, I know, I know, dessert.
DANNY: Straight to dessert.
CLARA: Gotcha.
DANNY: So, er, how was your day?
CLARA: Good. You know. Teaching.
DANNY: Yep, teaching.
CLARA: Teaching, teaching.
DANNY: Totally teaching.
CLARA: We probably shouldn't talk about work.
DANNY: God, yeah.
CLARA: Though, do you take Courtney for anything?
(A little later they are still laughing.)
DANNY: Are you serious?
CLARA: She said she couldn't concentrate on her work, because my face was too wide.
DANNY: Wide?
CLARA: I could kill that girl some days.
DANNY: Me too.
CLARA: And from you, that means something.
DANNY: Sorry?
(The jovial atmosphere dissipates instantly. We see Clara at home, putting her high heels by the kettle.)
DANNY: I dug twenty three wells.
CLARA: I'm sorry?
DANNY: Twenty three wells. When I was a soldier. Twenty three.
CLARA: Okay. Good. Good wells.
DANNY: Yeah, they were good, actually.
 CLARA: I'm not doubting the quality of your wells.
DANNY: Whole villages saved. Actual towns full of people. People I didn't shoot. People I kept safe.
CLARA: Okay. Point taken. Seriously.
DANNY: So why doesn't that ever get mentioned?
CLARA: I'm sorry I didn't mention your twenty three wells.
WAITER: Excuse me?
CLARA: Sorry.
WAITER: Er, water for the table?
CLARA: Don't you worry. He'll probably dig for it.
(The waiter leaves with the jug of water. After a few moments, Danny laughs.)
DANNY: Sorry.
CLARA: It's okay.
DANNY: Sensitive subject.
CLARA: Yes. Can slightly see that.
DANNY: Sometimes people like you get the wrong end of the stick.
CLARA: People like me?
(In her apartment, Clara takes a sip of the hot drink she has made.)
DANNY: I wasn't making assumptions about you.
CLARA: That really is exactly what you were doing.
DANNY: You were making assumptions about me.
CLARA: I made a joke.
DANNY: A not-funny joke.
CLARA: Yeah, well, do you know what I'm making now?
DANNY: A fuss?
CLARA: An exit.
(Clara puts on her coat and leaves the restaurant. Danny thumps his head on the table.)

[Clara's bedroom]

(The door hits something as it opens. The Doctor is sitting at Clara's dressing table.)
DOCTOR: You just have to squeeze through.
CLARA: Doctor?
DOCTOR: Why do you have three mirrors? Why don't you just turn your head?
CLARA: What are you doing in here?
DOCTOR: You said you had a date. I thought I'd better hide in the bedroom in case you brought him home. Bit early, aren't you? Did it all go wrong, or is this good by your standards?
CLARA: It was a disaster and I am extremely upset about it, since you didn't ask.
DOCTOR: Fine. I need you, for a thing.
CLARA: I can't.
DOCTOR: Oh, of course you can. Come on, you're free. More than usually free, in fact.
CLARA: No, it's just possible that I might get a phone call.
DOCTOR: From the date guy? It's too late. You've taken your make-up off.
CLARA: No, I haven't. I'm still wearing my make-up.
DOCTOR: Oh, right. Well, you probably just missed a bit. Come on, come on, come on, come on.

[Tardis]

(Clara is carrying her shoes.)
CLARA: I haven't actually said yes.
DOCTOR: Yes, you know sometimes when you talk to yourself, what if you're not?
CLARA: Not what?
DOCTOR: What if it's not you you're talking to? Proposition. What if no one is ever really alone? What if every single living being has a companion, a silent passenger, a shadow? What if the prickle on the back of your neck, is the breath of something close behind you?
CLARA: How long have you been travelling alone?
DOCTOR: Perhaps I never have.
(He shows her the blackboard with the word he didn't write.)
CLARA: It looks like your handwriting.
DOCTOR: Well, I couldn't have written it and forgotten, could I?
CLARA: Have you met you? What's all this?
(A table strewn with books.)
DOCTOR: Dreams. Accounts of dreams, by different people, all through history. You see, I have a theory.
CLARA: I'll bet you have. What theory?
DOCTOR: I think everybody, at some point in their lives, has the exact same nightmare. You wake up, or you think you do, and there's someone in the dark, someone close, or you think there might be.
(As evidenced by the little boy, the little girl, the old woman waking in their respective beds, putting on the light and sitting on the edge of the bed, feet on the floor.)
DOCTOR: So you sit up,and  turn on the light. And the room looks different at night. It ticks and creaks and breathes. And you tell yourself there's nobody there, nobody watching, nobody listening, nobody there at all. And you very nearly believe it. You really, really try and then.
(A hand reaches out from under the beds and grabs the left ankle.)
DOCTOR: There are accounts of that dream throughout human history. Time and time again, the same dream. Now, there is a very obvious question I'm about to ask you. Do you know what it is?
CLARA: Have you had that dream?
DOCTOR: Exactly.
CLARA: No, that was me asking you. Have you had that dream?
DOCTOR: I asked first.
CLARA: No, I did.
DOCTOR: You really didn't.
CLARA: Okay, yeah, probably. Yes. But everyone dreams about something under the bed.
DOCTOR: Why?
(The Doctor places Clara's fingers into squidgy sections on the Tardis console.)
DOCTOR: Just hold on tight. If anything bites, let it.
CLARA: What is it?
DOCTOR: Tardis telepathic interface. You are now in mental contact with the Tardis, so don't think anything rude.
CLARA: Why not?
DOCTOR: It might end up on all of the screens. The Tardis is extrapolating your entire timeline, from the moment of your birth, to the moment of your death.
CLARA: Which I do not need a preview of.
DOCTOR: I'm turning off the safeguards and navigation, slaving the Tardis to you. Focus on the dream. Focus on the details. Picture them, feel them. The Tardis will track on your subconscious and extract the relevant information. It should be able to home in on the moment in your timeline when you first had that dream. And then, we'll see.
CLARA: What will we see?
DOCTOR: What's under your bed.
(He starts the Tardis flying.)
CLARA: Ooo!
DOCTOR: Okay, now don't get distracted. Remember, you are flying a time machine.
(Clara's mobile phone rings, and the image of Danny greeting her at the restaurant flashes into her mind. As the Doctor walks around the console to her, he passes a blackboard with lots of items chalked on it, beginning with Evolution Perfects. It is what he wrote at the top of the show.)
DOCTOR: No, no. Don't you dare. No, don't. Don't, don't. Just ignore it.
(The Tardis lands.)
DOCTOR: Okay, that's good. That worked. We're here.
CLARA: Sorry, I think I got distracted.
DOCTOR: No, no, no, no, no. The date's fine. Come on.
CLARA: Come on where?
DOCTOR: Your childhood.
(The Doctor leaves. Clara tugs hard to try and release her fingers from the Tardis interface. On the third try she is free to follow.)

[Outside the building]

(Night.)
DOCTOR: The West Country Children's Home. Gloucester. By the ozone level and the drains, mid-nineties. You must have been here when you had the dream.
CLARA: Never been to Gloucester in my life, and I've never lived in a children's home.
DOCTOR: You've probably just forgotten. Have you seen the size of human brains? They're hilarious. Little you must be in here somewhere, with your little brain.
CLARA: Isn't it bad if I meet myself?
DOCTOR: It is potentially catastrophic.
CLARA: So why did you bring me out here?
DOCTOR: I was still talking. I needed someone to nod. Probably best for you to wait in the Tardis.
CLARA: Doctor, I
DOCTOR: See you in a minute. Tardis.
CLARA: Doctor. If I had have been distracted, what would have happened?
DOCTOR: We would probably have ended up in the wrong place. But don't think we have, because the time zone's right. I won't be long.
(The Doctor walks away. A young boy waves from an upstairs window. He reminds Clara of how Danny waves. Then he opens his window and calls down.)
RUPERT: What are you doing down there?
CLARA: Nothing. Er, I'm just. What's your name?
RUPERT: Rupert.
CLARA: Oh. Okay. Hello, Rupert.
RUPERT: Rupert Pink. It's a stupid name.
CLARA: No, it isn't. I know somebody called Pink.
RUPERT: I meant Rupert. I'm going to change it.
CLARA: Why are you awake? Are you scared?

[Children's home]

(The sonic screwdriver is scanning as the Doctor walks along the corridor. A balding man in glasses opens a door. We hear the TV on in the background.)
REG: How did you get in?
DOCTOR: Your door must be faulty.
(The Doctor holds up his psychic paper.)
REG: An inspection? It's two in the morning.
DOCTOR: When better? Do you always work here nights?
REG: Most nights, yes.
DOCTOR: Do you ever end up talking to yourself?
REG: All the time. It's this place. You can't help it.
DOCTOR: What about your coffee?
REG: My coffee?
(Reg looks at the mug he put down on the table. We see Clara going up the stairs behind them.)
DOCTOR: Sometimes, do you put it down, and look round, and it's not there?
REG: Everybody does that.
DOCTOR: Yes. Everybody.
(The television switches off.)
DOCTOR: Who turned your telly off?
REG: It does that. It just goes off.
(The Doctor has vanished. Reg looks for his mug, but it has vanished too. The Doctor walks along the corridor and takes a drink from it.)
DOCTOR: Hmm.
(Clara opens a creaky door and walks along an upstairs corridor.)

[Rupert's room]

(Rupert is sitting on the floor by the window.)
CLARA: Hello.
RUPERT: Hello.
CLARA: Nice room. You know, you should have more than one chair. What do you do when people come round?
RUPERT: Sit on the bed.
CLARA: Why aren't you sitting on it, then? Do you think that there's something underneath it? Hey, everyone thinks that, sometimes. That's just how people think at night.
RUPERT: Why?
CLARA: Did you have a dream? A hand grabbing your foot? You have, haven't you? You've had that exact dream.
RUPERT: How did you know?
CLARA: Do you know why dreams are called dreams?
RUPERT: Why?
CLARA: Because they're not real. If they were, they wouldn't need a name.
RUPERT: What are you doing?
(Clara looks underneath the bed.)
CLARA: Do you know what's under there?
RUPERT: What?
CLARA: Me!
(Clara rolls under the bed and lies on her back.)
CLARA: Come on, It's perfectly safe.
(Rupert lies next to her.)
CLARA: See? Nobody here, except us.
RUPERT: Sometimes I hear noises.
CLARA: It's a house full of people. Of course you hear noises.
RUPERT: They're all asleep.
CLARA: They're all dreaming.
RUPERT: Can you hear dreams?
CLARA: If you're clever enough. But they can't harm you. You know, sometimes we think there's something behind us. And the space under your bed is what's behind you at night. Simple as that. There's nothing to be afraid of.
(The bed creaks as someone sits on it. It sags to within inches of Clara's nose. Rupert starts breathing quickly.)
CLARA: (sotto) Who else is in this room?
RUPERT: (sotto) Nobody.
CLARA: (sotto) Someone must have come in.
RUPERT: (sotto) Nobody came in.
(Clara rolls out and stands up. There is someone sitting on the bed, covered in the red crocheted bedspread.)
CLARA: Hello?
(She helps Rupert stand up.)
CLARA: Who's this? This is a friend of yours playing a game. Playing a trick, are you, hey? A little trick on Rupert here?
(The bed creaks as the figure shifts, sitting up taller.)
CLARA: Okay. It's not funny this, you know.
(The light is switched on. Clara and Rupert turn to see the Doctor sitting in the chair flicking through a book. The figure is still covered by the bedspread.)
DOCTOR: Where is he?
CLARA: Doctor?
DOCTOR: I can't find him. Can you find him?
CLARA: Find who?
DOCTOR: Wally.
CLARA: Wally?
DOCTOR: He's nowhere in this book.
RUPERT: It's not a Where's Wally one.
DOCTOR: Well, how would you know? Maybe you just haven't found him yet.
RUPERT: He's not in every book.
DOCTOR: Really? Well, that's a few years of my life I'll be needing back. Are you scared? The thing on the bed, whatever it is, look at it. Does it scare you?
RUPERT: Yes.
DOCTOR: Well, that's good. Want to know why that's good?
RUPERT: Why?
DOCTOR: Let me tell you about scared. Your heart is beating so hard, I can feel it through your hands. There's so much blood and oxygen pumping through your brain, it's like rocket fuel. Right now, you could run faster and you could fight harder, you could jump higher than ever in your life. And you are so alert, it's like you can slow down time. What's wrong with scared? Scared is a superpower. It's your superpower. There is danger in this room and guess what? It's you. Do you feel it? Do you think he feels it? Do you think he's scared? Nah. Loser. Turn your back on him.
RUPERT: What?
DOCTOR: Yeah, turn your back on him. Come on. You too, Clara. Clara, your back, now.
(The Doctor turns and goes to the window.)
DOCTOR: Do it. Just do it now. Turn your back. Do it now, turn your back. Lovely view out this window.
(Rupert stands between them.)
CLARA: Yeah. Come and see all the dark.
DOCTOR: The deep and lovely dark. We'd never see the stars without it. Now, there are two possibilities. Possibility one, it's just one of your friends standing there, and he's playing a joke on you. Possibility two, it isn't.
CLARA: So, plan? Plans are good.
DOCTOR: You on the bed, I'm talking to you now. Go in peace. We won't look. Just go. If all you want to do is stay hidden, it's okay. Just leave.
(The figure moves up close behind them.)
CLARA: Is it gone?
DOCTOR: Don't look round. Not yet.
RUPERT: I can't hear anything.
DOCTOR: Don't look round.
(Rupert starts to turn around.)
DOCTOR: Look away! Look away now! Don't look at it! Don't look round. Don't look round. Don't look at the reflection.
RUPERT: What is it?
(The thing pulls the bedspread off, and we get a glimpse of an out of focus maybe-not-quite-human forehead and eyes.)
DOCTOR: Imagine a thing that must never be seen. What would it do if you saw it?
RUPERT: I don't know.
DOCTOR: Neither do I. Close your eyes.
RUPERT: What?
DOCTOR: Close your eyes. You too, Clara. Give it what it wants. Prove to it that you're not going to look at it. Make a promise. A promise you're never going to look at it.
RUPERT: I promise never to look.
DOCTOR: The breath on the back of your neck, like your hair's standing on end. That means, don't look round.
(The door slams shut.)
CLARA: Gone.
DOCTOR: Gone.
RUPERT: He took my bedspread.
DOCTOR: Oh, the human race. You're never happy, are you?
RUPERT: Am I safe now?
(Clara and the Doctor look at Rupert's toys. The Doctor is interested in his orange robot.)
DOCTOR: Nobody's safe, especially not at night in the dark, Anything can get you. And all the way up here, you're up here all alone.
(Clara slaps the back of the Doctor's head.)
DOCTOR: What was that for?
CLARA: Shut up, leave this to me.
(She has found a box of toy plastic soldiers.)
CLARA: These yours?
RUPERT: They're the home's.
CLARA: They're yours now.
DOCTOR: People don't need to be lied to.
CLARA: People don't need to be scared by a big gray-haired stick insect, but here you are. Stay still, shut up. See what I'm doing? This is your army.
(Clara puts the little soldiers on guard around Rupert's bed.)
DOCTOR: Plastic army.
CLARA: Sit! And they're going to guard under your bed. You see this one? This is the boss one, the colonel. He's going to keep a special eye out.
RUPERT: It's broken, that one. It doesn't have a gun.
CLARA: That's why he's the boss. A soldier so brave he doesn't need a gun. He can keep the whole world safe. What shall we call him?
RUPERT: Dan.
CLARA: Sorry?
RUPERT: Dan, the soldier man. That's what I call him.
CLARA: Good. Good name.
RUPERT: Yeah. Would you read me a story? It'll help me get to sleep.
CLARA: Sure.
DOCTOR: Once upon a time.
(He touches Rupert's forehead and the boy falls back, asleep.)
DOCTOR: The end. Dad skills.
(After all, if you're a grandfather, you've probably been a father first.)

[Tardis]

CLARA: So is it possible we've just saved that kid from another kid in a bedspread?
DOCTOR: Entirely possible, yes. The bigger question is, why did we end up with him, and not you?
CLARA: I got distracted.
DOCTOR: But why that particular boy? You don't have any. You don't have any kind of connection with him, do you?
CLARA: No. No, no, no. Of course not. Why do you ask?
(The Doctor is working on a Tardis component.)
DOCTOR: The Tardis was slaved to your timeline. Theoretically, there should have been some connection.
CLARA: Will er, will he remember any of that?
DOCTOR: Scrambled his memory. Gave him a big old dream about being Dan the soldier man.
(Clara starts crying.)
DOCTOR: Are you okay?
CLARA: Doctor, I am sorry to ask, and, you know, I realise this is probably against the laws of time, or summat. Er, could you do me a favour?

[Outside the restaurant]

(Clara leaves the restaurant, and Danny bangs his head on the table. The Doctor and Clara step out of the Tardis.)
CLARA: Is that what I look like from the back?
DOCTOR: It's fine.
CLARA: I was thinking it was good.
DOCTOR: Really?
(Clara walks to the restaurant.)

[Restaurant]

(She sits down opposite Danny, who raises his head from the table.)
CLARA: Sorry.
DANNY: Hey.
(Clara holds out her hand.)
CLARA: Hello. I'm Clara Oswald. I'm a bit tricky, sometimes a bit up myself, and I do not like my surname, but I think that's basically everything you need to worry about.
(He takes her hand.)
DANNY: Hello, I'm. I'm sorry
CLARA: Also, I mouth off when I'm nervous and I've got a mouth on me. Seriously, it's got a mind of its own. I'm really worried it wants to go solo.
DANNY: I don't know what to say.
CLARA: Don't say anything. Or say something nice.
DANNY: I like your name.
CLARA: It's a start.
DANNY: Oswald. It suits you.
CLARA: Drifting now.
DANNY: Yeah, it's better than Pink.
CLARA: No, Pink, Pink is nice. I like pink.
DANNY: You can have it.
CLARA: Ooo, a bold offer, Mister Pink.
DANNY: I meant. You, no
CLARA: I know, I know.
DANNY: Why can't I speak today?
CLARA: It's that foot you're keeping in your mouth.
DANNY: Is that where I put it?
CLARA: Anyway. Clara Pink. Too much.
DANNY: Yeah, it is a bit much.
CLARA: Mind you, Rupert Pink.
(In the background, someone drops a glass and it breaks.)
DANNY: Sorry?
CLARA: Er, ha, ha. Rupert Pink. It's not good.
DANNY: Rupert?
CLARA: Yeah. That was your name, yeah?
DANNY: Who told you that?
CLARA: Er, someone in the school.
(She looks away and clucks her tongue against her palate.)
DANNY: No, I haven't used that name for years.
CLARA: I cannot remember who it was.
DANNY: Are you making fun of me?
CLARA: No. No, no, no. No way.
DANNY: Is this a joke?
CLARA: Danny, nothing about this is any kind of joke.
(The door to the kitchens creaks opens and a spaceman walks in.)
DANNY: Where's your coat?
CLARA: My what?
DANNY: You put your coat on when you left.
CLARA: Er, I'm really sorry. Danny. There is something I should probably be honest about.
DANNY: How about everything?
CLARA: Everything, in my case, is actually quite a lot.
DANNY: Well, that's weird.
CLARA: No, no, no, it's not weird. Not really Where are you going?
DANNY: I don't do weird.
CLARA: Don't go.
DANNY: Then do something for me, Tell me the truth, because I know when people are lying to me. However weird this thing may be, just tell me the truth.
CLARA: It's not weird
(Clara sees the spaceman beckoning to her.)
CLARA: Exactly.
(The Tardis is visible as the spaceman returns to the kitchen.)
DANNY: I've had enough.
(Danny leaves. Clara sighs, then heads to the kitchens.)

[Tardis]

(She slams the door shut and talks to the spaceman.)
CLARA: I am trying to have a date. A real life, inter-human actual date! It's a normal nice, everyday, meeting-up sort of thing. And I would just like to know, is there any other way you can make this any more surreal than it already is?
(The spaceman takes off his helmet. He is a total dead ringer for Danny Pink, but with bigger hair and a fuller beard.)
ORSON: Hello.
DOCTOR: Ah, Clara! Well done, you found her. Now this is really a bit strange.
CLARA: Danny?
DOCTOR: What's gone wrong with your face? It's all eyes! Why are you all eyes? Get them under control.
ORSON: Er, who's Danny?
DOCTOR: This is Colonel Orson Pink, from about a hundred years in your future.
CLARA: Orson Pink?
DOCTOR: Yeah, I laughed too. Sorry. Do you have any connection with him?
CLARA: Connection?
DOCTOR: Yes, maybe you're like a distant relative or something?
CLARA: How, how would I know?
DOCTOR: Right. Okay. (to Orson) Er, well, do you have any old family photographs of her? You know, probably quite old and really fat-looking?
ORSON: I don't.
CLARA: How did you find him?
DOCTOR: Well, you left a trace in the Tardis telepathic circuits. I fired them up again and the Tardis brought me straight to him. So he is something to do with your timeline.
CLARA: Okay.
DOCTOR: And you'll never guess where I found him.

[Capsule]

(A spaceship is sitting on a rocky planet with a massive hemisphere of a sun dominating the horizon. Calling it a time capsule implies it is much smaller than it really is.)
CLARA: Where are we?
DOCTOR: The end of the road. This is it, the end of everything. The last planet.
CLARA: The end of the universe?
DOCTOR: The Tardis isn't supposed to come this far, but some idiot turned the safeguards off. Listen.
CLARA: To what?
DOCTOR: Nothing. There's nothing to hear. There's nothing anywhere. Not a breath, not a slither, not a click or a tick. All the clocks have stopped. This is the silence at the end of time.
(A clattering as Orson empties the contents of a locker into a rucksack.)
CLARA: Then how did he get here? If he's from a hundred years in my future
DOCTOR: Pioneer time traveller.
(The Doctor sonicks the records up on the computer. The BBC is still using the same Breaking News ticker at the bottom of the screen.)
DOCTOR: Rode the first of the great time shots. They were supposed to fire him into the middle of the next week.
CLARA: What happened?
DOCTOR: He went a bit far.
CLARA: A bit?
DOCTOR: A big bit. Look at him now. Robinson Crusoe at the end of time itself. The last man standing in the universe. I always thought that would be me.
CLARA: It's not a competition.
DOCTOR: I know it's not a competition. Course it isn't. Still time, though.
CLARA: He looks like he's packing.
DOCTOR: He's been stranded for six months, just met a time traveller. Of course he's packing.
(Orson enters.)
ORSON: You can do it, then? You can get me home?
DOCTOR: I just showed you, didn't I? A test flight to a restaurant.
ORSON: Yes, but to my family, to my own time?
DOCTOR: Easy. I can do that, can't I, Clara?
CLARA: He can, yes.
ORSON: Is everything okay?
CLARA: Yeah, fine. I'm fine.
ORSON: Do I know you?
CLARA: No. Nope.
DOCTOR: Is she doing the all eyes thing? It's because her face is so wide. She needs three mirrors.
CLARA: Doctor.
DOCTOR: We can't leave immediately, though. The Tardis needs to recharge.
CLARA: Sorry. What?
DOCTOR: Overnight, that should do it, shouldn't it, Clara?
ORSON: Overnight?
DOCTOR: One more night. That's, that's not a problem, is it?
(Orson's face says yes, but -)
ORSON: No. No, no problem.
DOCTOR: It's a shame, isn't it?
ORSON: What's a shame?
DOCTOR: There's only three people left in the universe, and you're lying to the other two. It was the first thing I noticed when I stepped in here. You must have seen it, too, Clara. You've got eyes out to here.
CLARA: Seen what?
DOCTOR: The universe is dead. Everything that ever was is dead and gone. There's nothing beyond this door but nothingness for ever. So why is it locked?
ORSON: Please, don't make me spend another night here.
DOCTOR: Afraid of the dark? But the dark is empty now.
ORSON: No. No, it isn't.

[Tardis]

(Clara wears the rucksack, Orson carrys two metal cases. She leads him down below the time rotor level.)
CLARA: You'll be safe in here. Nothing gets through those doors, I promise.
ORSON: And you two are going to wait out there?
CLARA: That would seem to be the plan. Wait for what exactly?
ORSON: Why can't we just leave?
CLARA: Like he said, it's recharging.
ORSON: You didn't look like you believed him.
CLARA: That's just how my face looks when he talks.
(A clear plastic box containing a gun-less plastic soldier falls from Orson's backpack when she puts it down. Clara picks it up.)
ORSON: It's just a silly toy thing. A family heirloom, supposed to bring good luck.
CLARA: Right. Yes. Didn't do a very good job, did it?
ORSON: It did. You're here, aren't you? What were the chances of you two finding me?
CLARA: Orson, do me a favour. Take my advice. When you get home, stay away from time travel.
(She gives him the toy back.)
ORSON: It runs in the family.
CLARA: What? Sorry, what do you mean, runs in the family?
ORSON: Nothing. It's just silly stories one of my grandparents. well, great-grandparents
CLARA: What is it? Tell me. You asked if you knew me. It's a family heirloom?
(Orson holds Dan the soldier man out to her and they hold hands around it.)
ORSON: Yeah.

[Capsule]

CLARA: What are we doing?
DOCTOR: Waiting.
CLARA: For what? For who? If everybody in the universe is dead, then there's nobody out there.
DOCTOR: That's one way of looking at it.
CLARA: What's the other?
DOCTOR: That's a hell of a lot of ghosts.
(The lights dim.)
CLARA: Do you have your own mood lighting now? Because, frankly, the accent is enough.
(The capsule creaks. Words appear on the main hatch - Do Not Open The Door.)
CLARA: Where did that come from?
DOCTOR: It's always been there. It's only visible in the night lights.
CLARA: But who wrote it?
DOCTOR: Colonel Pink. Apparently, at night, he needs a reminder. Six months stranded alone, I suppose it must be tempting.
CLARA: What is?
DOCTOR: Company.
(More slow creaking.)
CLARA: What's that?
DOCTOR: What kind of explanation would you like?
CLARA: A reassuring one?
DOCTOR: Well, the systems are switching to low power. There are temperature differentials all over this ship. It's like pipes banging when the heating goes off.
CLARA: Always thought there was something in the pipes.
DOCTOR: Me, too. Who were you having dinner with?
CLARA: Are you making conversation?
DOCTOR: I thought that I would give it a try.
CLARA: I told you. A date.
DOCTOR: Serious?
CLARA: It's a date.
DOCTOR: A serious date?
CLARA: Do I have to bring him to you for approval?
DOCTOR: Well, I would like to know about his prospects. If you like, I can pop ahead and check them out.
CLARA: Frankly, you've already done enough.
(What sounds like a scream makes them jump.)
DOCTOR: Atmospheric pressure equalising
CLARA: Or?
DOCTOR: Company.
CLARA: Why are we doing this? Why don't we just go?
DOCTOR: Because I need to know.
CLARA: Why? About what?
DOCTOR: Suppose that there are creatures that live to hide. That only show themselves to the very young or the very old, or the mad, or anyone who wouldn't be believed.
CLARA: Okay, so
DOCTOR: What would those creatures do when everyone was gone? When there was only one man left standing in the universe?
(Bang, bang, bang.)
CLARA: What's that?
DOCTOR: Potentially, the hull cooling.
CLARA: Potentially?
DOCTOR: Believably.
(Bang, bang, bang.)
DOCTOR: Someone knocking.
(Bang, bang, bang.)
DOCTOR: Yes.
(Bang, bang, bang. Scrape, scrape, scrape.)
CLARA: Doctor,
(Bang, bang, bang.)
CLARA: You don't actually believe all this, do you? Hiding creatures, things from under the bed.
(Bang, bang, bang. Scrape, scrape, scrape.)
DOCTOR: What's that in the mirror, or the corner of your eye? What's that footstep following, but never passing by?
(Bang, bang, bang.)
CLARA: Did we come to the end of the universe because of a nursery rhyme?
(Bang, bang, bang. Bang, bang, bang. The Doctor sonicks the hatch to Unlocked. The mechanism starts to turn.)
CLARA: That's you turning it, right?
DOCTOR: No. Get in the Tardis.
CLARA: Why?
DOCTOR: I have to know.
CLARA: Doctor. Doctor
DOCTOR: The Tardis, now!
CLARA: Okay, okay. Somebody is out there. Now we know, we can leave. Oh, Doctor!
DOCTOR: It's a pressure lock. Releasing it could've triggered the opening mechanism.
CLARA: Is there even an atmosphere out there?
DOCTOR: There is an air shell round the ship. Why are you still here?
CLARA: Because I am not going to leave you in danger!
DOCTOR: Then you will never travel with me again, because that is the deal! Tardis, now! Do as you are told!
(Clara runs to the Tardis.)
CLARA: You're an idiot.
(She goes inside.)
DOCTOR: I know.

[Tardis]

ORSON: What's happening?
CLARA: He's opening the door.

[Capsule]

DOCTOR: Perhaps they're all just waiting, perhaps when we're all dead, out they'll come a-slithering from underneath the bed.
(The airlock opens.)

[Tardis]

CLARA: Oh, no, no, no, not now, come on!
(The scanner flickers as the air starts to leave the capsule..)
CLARA: Oh! Always when it's important!
(The Tardis jolts.)
CLARA: What's happening?
(A klaxon sounds.)
CLARA: What's that?
ORSON: The alarm. The air shell's breached. Stay here.
(The scanner flickers on to show the Doctor hanging on to the edge of a console as the air and anything loose is sucked out of the capsule. A gloved hand grabs his wrist as he starts to slip and he is pulled to safety. A short time later, the unconscious Doctor is back in the Tardis.)
CLARA: Is he okay?
ORSON: He's out cold. He'll be fine, though.
CLARA: Something hit him.
ORSON: Everything was flying out of that door.
CLARA: Could've been that.
ORSON: Yeah.
(We still hear a group of three sounds repeating in the background.)
CLARA: What was out there? What were you so afraid of?
ORSON: I've been here a long time. My own shadow, probably.
CLARA: Yeah.
(Rumble. The Tardis doors move slightly.)
ORSON: That's probably just the rest of the air escaping.
CLARA: You say probably a lot.
(Creak, whumph!)
ORSON: We are safe? Nothing can get in here, right?
CLARA: Probably.
(A hissing sound, like air escaping? The Cloister Bell tolls. Clara goes to the console.)
ORSON: Have you got a plan?
CLARA: Telepathic circuits. I left a trace in them before.
ORSON: So?
CLARA: So apparently, that can do a thing.
(She sticks her fingers into the console again.)
ORSON: What, that's your plan?
CLARA: It's not a plan, it's a thing.
(The time rotor starts to stutter.)
CLARA: (sotto) Okay. Come on, come on, you can do it!
(The Doctor wheezes.)
CLARA: Come on! Sorry.
(The time rotor gets up to speed.)
CLARA: Here we go! Come on. Come on!
(The Tardis lands with a thump. The Cloister Bell has stopped and there are no more three part bangs on the sound track.)
ORSON: Is that it?
CLARA: I don't know. I think so.
(The scanner isn't much help.)
ORSON: Where are we?
CLARA: Somewhere else. I hope. No, no, no, you stay and look after the Doctor.
ORSON: You can't go out there by yourself.
CLARA: Thing is, my timeline, it keeps on. Orson, you don't want to meet yourself. It's really embarrassing.

[Barn]

(The Tardis door creaks slightly as Clara closes it. On a raised platform is a simple bed, and a child is lying curled up on their side under a blanket, sobbing as the star and/or moonlight streams down through the roof. Clara climbs the ladder to the platform.)
CLARA: Rupert?
(She walks to the bed.)
CLARA: Orson?
(The barn door opens and we see two pairs of feet enter. The woman wears a long skirt with an apron over the top.)
MAN: Why does he have to sleep out here?
WOMAN: He doesn't want the others to hear him crying.
MAN: Why does he have to cry all the time?
(Clara hides under the bed.)
WOMAN: You know why.
MAN: There'll be no crying in the army.
WOMAN: Hush.
MAN: Don't pretend you're not awake. We're not idiots.
WOMAN: Come and sleep in the house. You don't have to be alone. If you can hear me, you're very welcome in the house, with the other boys. I'll leave the door on the latch. Come in any time.
MAN: He can't just run away crying all the time if he wants to join the army.
WOMAN: He doesn't want to join the army. I keep telling you.
MAN: Well, he's not going to the Academy, is he, that boy? He'll never make a Time Lord.

[Tardis]

(The Doctor wakes suddenly.)
DOCTOR: Sontarans! Perverting the course of human history! 
ORSON: (sotto) Doctor?
DOCTOR: You're confusing me. What? Shut up, shut up. Where's Clara?

[Barn]

DOCTOR [OC]: Clara! Clara!
BOY: Hello? Who's there? Hello?
(The boy sits on the edge of his bed, and Clara grabs his ankle as if by reflex.)
CLARA: It's okay. This is just a dream. Just lie back again. Just lie back on the bed. It will all be okay if you just lie down and go to sleep. Just do that for me. Just sleep.
(She releases his ankle and the boy gets back into bed. Clara sits on the edge of the bed and puts her hand on his head, stroking his hair gently as he sobs to himself. She whispers into his ear.)
CLARA: Listen

[Tardis]

ORSON: What happened? What did you see? What's out there?
(Clara returns.)
CLARA: What if there was nothing? What if there never was anything? Nothing under the bed, nothing at the door. What if the big bad Time Lord doesn't want to admit he's just afraid of the dark.
DOCTOR: Where are we? Have we moved? Where have we landed?
CLARA: Don't look where we are. Take off, and promise me you will never look where we've been.
DOCTOR: Why?
CLARA: Just take off. Don't ask questions.
DOCTOR: I don't take orders, Clara.
CLARA: Do as you're told.
(The Tardis dematerialises. The boy sits up in his bed.)
CLARA [OC]: Listen

[Barn]

(Earlier, whispering into his ear. We are also shown Orson being returned home, and giving Clara a hug.)
CLARA: This is just a dream. But very clever people can hear dreams. So, please, just listen. I know you're afraid, but being afraid is all right. Because didn't anybody ever tell you? Fear is a superpower. Fear can make you faster and cleverer and stronger. And one day, you're going to come back to this barn. And on that day you're going to be very afraid indeed.
(The new 9th / War Doctor or Warrior as I called him, stands in the wilderness looking at the lonely barn, taken from the Day of the Doctor.)
CLARA: But that's okay. Because if you're very wise and very strong, fear doesn't have to make you cruel or cowardly.

[Tardis]

CLARA [OC]: Fear can make you kind.
(Clara grabs the Doctor from behind for a hug.)
DOCTOR: No, no. Not the hugging. No, no, no. I'm against the hugging. Please.

[Danny's flat]

(The Doctor drops Clara off and leaves. Danny's doorbell rings, so he goes and answers it.)
DANNY: I am so
CLARA: I know.

[Barn]

CLARA: It doesn't matter if there's nothing under the bed or in the dark, so long as you know it's okay to be afraid of it.

[Danny's flat]

DANNY: And I just get nervous.
CLARA: Me too.
DANNY: I don't even know what I'm nervous of.
(Over images of the Doctor underlining at the word Listen on his blackboard.)
CLARA [OC]: I'll show you. So, listen. If you listen to nothing else, listen to this.

[Barn]

CLARA: You're always going to be afraid, even if you learn to hide it. Fear is like a companion. A constant companion, always there. But that's okay, because fear can bring us together.
(Clara kisses Danny.)
CLARA: Fear can bring you home. I'm going to leave you something, just so you'll always remember, fear makes companions of us all.
(Clara leaves Dan the soldier man to stand guard as she says what the Doctor told Barbara while they were tied up in the Cave of Skulls. - Unearthly Child episode 3.)


[Clara's flat]
(The Tardis is parked in the living room for a change. The Doctor is in the tiny kitchen watching Clara's washing spinning in the machine whilst she checks her makeup in the dressing table mirror. We are treated to a view of his face also going round and round with the garments.)
DOCTOR: The Satanic Nebula.
(He looks at the little goldfish in the bowl on the counter.)
DOCTOR: Or the lagoon of lost stars. Or we could go to Brighton. I've got a whole day worked out.
CLARA: Sorry, but as you can see, I've got plans.
(Clara is in an open-necked white blouse with a thin black tie knotted halfway down her chest, black trousers with stilletto heels and is putting on a black jacket.)
DOCTOR: Have you?
CLARA: Look at me.
DOCTOR: Yeah, okay.
CLARA: No, no, no. No. Look at me.
DOCTOR: Yep, looking.
CLARA: Seriously?
DOCTOR: Why is your face all coloured in?

[Classroom - memory]

DANNY: 7.15. Meeting me. You are. Date. Second one.
CLARA: Got the words out. Not in the right order, but, hey. Maths teacher.
(A young boy enters just as they are leaning in for a kiss.)
BOTH: Out.

[Clara's flat]

DOCTOR: Are you taller?
CLARA: Heels.
DOCTOR: What, do you have to reach a high shelf?
CLARA: Right, got to go. Going to be late.
DOCTOR: For a shelf?
CLARA: Bye.
(A proper, old-fashioned telephone rings. It is the emergency one in the Tardis.)
CLARA: There you go, you've got another playmate.
DOCTOR: Hardly anyone in the universe has that number.
CLARA: Well, I've got it.
DOCTOR: Yes, from some woman in a shop. We still don't know who that was.
CLARA: Is that her now?
DOCTOR: There are very few people that it could be.
(He goes to answer it.)
CLARA: Don't.
DOCTOR: Why not?
CLARA: Because, if you answer it, something will happen.
DOCTOR: What?
CLARA: A thing.
DOCTOR: Huh. It's just a phone, Clara. Nothing happens when you answer the phone.
(He picks up the receiver.)

[Room]

(And the next thing we see is instead of the telephone, he is holding a large worm with a tiny pair of horns by its jaws up against his face. He screams and throws it onto the round table. Clara also screams and throws away a worm.)
CLARA: Doctor?
DOCTOR: Don't touch it.
CLARA: Where are we? How did we get here?
(A man with computer chips attached to the shaven right side of his head speaks. He is sitting to the left of Clara with his hand on a worm.)
PSI: Who are you? Sorry, what's going on? I don't understand.
(On his left is a dark-skinned woman. Her cheeks briefly bulge in imitation of the worm's horns.)
SAIBRA: Argh! What is that thing?
DOCTOR: It's a memory worm.
CLARA: What happened to your face?
DOCTOR: Deletes your memories.
CLARA: Did you see her face?
SAIBRA: How did I get here?
DOCTOR: The same way we all did, but we've all forgotten.
(There is a metal case in the middle of the table.)
SAIBRA: And who are you?
(The answers are broadcast through a speaker.)
DOCTOR [OC]: I am the Doctor, a Time Lord from Gallifrey. I have agreed to this memory wipe of my own free will.
CLARA [OC]: I am Clara Oswald, human. I have agreed to this memory wipe of my own free will. Do I really have to touch that worm thing?
DOCTOR [OC]: Yes, you do. And change your shoes. You're next, Psi.
PSI [OC]: I am Psi- augmented human. I have agreed to this memory wipe of my own free will.
(Psi takes a chip from his head and looks at it. It is marked Memory Compromised.)
SAIBRA [OC]: I am Saibra, mutant human. I have agreed to this memory wipe of my own free will.
(The case unlocks and opens with a golden light. It has two screens so that everyone can watch. An electronically manipulated voice speaks while a golden K in a circle is displayed, then a shadow in a hooded top, presumably the speaker. The voice has a slightly American style accent.)
ARCHITECT [OC]: This is a recorded message. I am the Architect. Your last memory is of receiving a contact from an unknown agency. Me. Everything since has been erased from your minds. Now, pay close attention to this briefing.
(The image now zoomed into a huge building alone one on a planet. It looks like an advertisement for the subject described.)
ARCHITECT [OC]: This is the Bank of Karabraxos, the most secure bank in the galaxy. A fortress for the super-rich. If you can afford your own star system, this is where you keep it. No one sets foot on the planet without protocols. All movement is monitored, all air consumption regulated. DNA is authenticated at every stage. Intruders will be incinerated.
(We see a woman breathe into a tube, but it stays red. Nozzles come out of the walls and burn her and her companion alive. Next shot is of an oriental couple placing a painting into a drawer.)
ARCHITECT [OC]: Each vault, buried deep in the earth, is accessed by a drop-slot at the planet's surface. It's atomically sealed, an unbreakable lock. The atoms have all been scrambled. Your presence on this planet is unauthorised. A team will have been despatched to terminate you.
(Someone hammers on the door and speaks through the grill.)
GUARD [OC]: This is bank security. Open up.
ARCHITECT [OC]: Your survival depends on following my instructions.
GUARD [OC]: Open up and you shall be humanely disposed of.
SAIBRA: There's another exit.
ARCHITECT [OC]: All the information you need is in this case.
(Psi takes a chip from his head and plugs it into the case.)
DOCTOR: What are you doing?
PSI: Downloading.
DOCTOR: Ah. Augmented. Nice.
ARCHITECT [OC]: The Bank of Karabraxos is impregnable.
(The Doctor takes a mobile phone sized item from the case.)
GUARD [OC]: Please stand away from the door. We do not wish to hurt you before incineration.
ARCHITECT [OC]: The Bank of Karabraxos has never been breached. You will rob the Bank of Karabraxos.
(Glass shatters.)

[Office]

(A woman in a very tight suit sits at a white table in a small white room and answers her intercom-on-a-stick.)
DELPHOX: Report.
GUARD [OC]: Sorry, hello? Who is this?
DELPHOX: This is Ms Delphox, Head of Bank Security. I sent you to investigate an off-world intruder.
GUARD [OC]: Did you? I was wondering what we're doing here.

[Room]

GUARD: We found these amazing worms.
(And he is holding one.)

[Teller's room]

(Ms Delphox leaves her desk and goes to the door. She breathes into a tube and it turns green, then opens the door to speak to guards in full armour standing by a misted up glass cage in the room next door.)
DELPHOX: Unwelcome guests. We're going to need the Teller.
(She taps on the glass.)
DELPHOX: Are you hungry, boy?
(And blows the thing inside a kiss.)

[Corridor]

(The four are running, the Doctor is trailing behind and getting out of breath.)
DOCTOR: Okay, okay, okay. Stop, stop, stop. Far enough. Augmented human. Computer augmented, yes? Mainframe in your head?
PSI: I'm a gamer. Sorry, who put you in charge?
DOCTOR: You're a liar. That's a prison code on your neck.
PSI: I'm a hacker slash bank robber.
DOCTOR: Good. This is a good day to be a bank robber. Mutant human. What kind of mutant?
SAIBRA: Like he says, why are you in charge now?
DOCTOR: It's my special power. What's yours?
(Saibra sighs and takes Clara's hand. For a few moments there are two Claras, then she lets go and changes back to her original self.)
SAIBRA: I touch living cells, I can replicate the owner.
CLARA: Your face, when we first saw you...
SAIBRA: I touched the worm.
CLARA: You can replicate their clothes too?
SAIBRA: I wear a hologram shell.
(The Doctor holds out the object he took from the case.)
DOCTOR: Human cells. DNA from a customer, maybe? A disguise to get us in?
CLARA: We're actually going to do it? Rob the bank?
DOCTOR: I don't think we have a choice. We've already agreed to.
(Saibra touches the object.)

[Outside the Bank]

(Now a grey-haired man in a suit is walking with the Doctor, Clara and Psi. This is Mister Porrima, although he is never actually named except on the cast list, so I'll use that here.)
DOCTOR: How long can you maintain the image for?
PORRIMA: For as long as I like.

[Banking hall]

(They enter. Saibra/Porrima leads the way through the massive open space.)
DOCTOR: Question one. Robbing banks is easy if you've got a Tardis. So why am I not using it?
CLARA: Question two, where is the Tardis?
DOCTOR: Okay, that probably should be question one.
(An alarm sounds and security grills block all the exits. The Bank computer has a friendly, slightly cheerful male voice.)
COMPUTER: Banking floor locking down.
PORRIMA: They know we're here.
COMPUTER: Banking floor locking down.
(Ms Delphox enters with two suited heavies and goes to a male customer. Then something with two-toed feet enters, wearing an orange prisoner jump-suit and its arms in a straight jacket. This being has its eyes on the end of flexible stalks, vaguely reminiscent of Gerry Anderson's Creons. It walks slowly with its armoured escort behind, holding onto the ends of its chains. The Teller, I presume.)
PORRIMA: (sotto) What is that?
DOCTOR: I don't know. Hate not knowing.
DELPHOX: Excuse me, sir. I regret to say that your guilt has been detected.
CUSTOMER: What? That, that's totally ridiculous.
DELPHOX: Is it, sir? Well then, we will certainly double-check. The Teller will now scan your thoughts for any criminal intent. Good luck, sir.
(Delphox moves away. The customer puts down his briefcase.)
DOCTOR: Interesting.
PSI: What is?
DOCTOR: The latest thing in sniffer dogs. Telepathic. It hunts guilt.
(A high pitched sound makes the unfortunate customer hold his head in pain.)
CLARA: What about our guilt?
DOCTOR: Currently being drowned out.
CLARA: What's he doing?
DOCTOR: If he has a plan, he's trying not to think of it.
PSI: Ever tried not thinking about something?
CLARA: No.
PORRIMA: You may have to.
(The creature roars.)
DELPHOX: Ah, criminal intent detected. How naughty. What was your plan? Counterfeit currency in your briefcase, perhaps?
CUSTOMER: No, not at all. For God's sake.
DELPHOX: It doesn't really matter, we'll establish the details later. The Teller is never wrong when it comes to guilt. Your account will now be deleted, and obviously your mind. Suppertime.
(The armoured guards hold on to the creature's chains as it steps closer to the customer. It puts its eye stalks together and a pulsating ray is aimed at the customer's head. He clutches his head and Psi feels something, too.)
DOCTOR: It's wiping his mind. Turning his brain into soup.
DELPHOX: Your next of kin will be informed, and incarcerated, as further inducement to honest financial transactions.
(The customer screams.)
CLARA: We've got to help him.
DOCTOR: He's gone already. It's over.
CLARA: He's in agony, look at him.
DOCTOR: Those aren't tears, Clara. That's soup.
(The creature separates its eye stalks. The man stops screaming and a suited heavy catches him. The front of his brain pan is caved in.)
DELPHOX: Account closed. Take him away. He's ready for his close-up.
(She uses a microphone to broadcast.)
DELPHOX: Apologies for the disturbance. Everyone have a lovely day.

[Deposit booth]

(Our four enter a small room with red walls broken up by faux marble columns. There is a computer interface on the wall opposite the ornate metal doors.)
COMPUTER: Deposit booth locking. Please exhale. Your valuables will be transported up from the vault.
(Mister Porrima breaths into the tube. It turns green and Saibra changes back to herself. A case arrives.)
PSI: If he can break in here and plant this thing, then why does he need our help?
DOCTOR: Depends what the thing is.
(He opens the case.)
DOCTOR: Okay, well, I'm no expert, but fuses, timer. I'm going to stick my neck out and say bomb. (to Psi) Bank schematic. Now.
(Psi goes to one of the marble columns and plugs in. A screen appears.)

[Office]

(Ms Delphox is reading the guard's report.)
DELPHOX: So, the man we captured on the banking floor wasn't the target.
GUARD: Four visitors just entered a safety-deposit box.
DELPHOX: The greatest bank in the galaxy. Our reputation must remain secure. The Director will blame us. We'll be fired. Fired with pain.

[Deposit booth]

(Psi has got the schematics on view.)
DOCTOR: The floor below is all service corridors, the veins and arteries of the bank.
(Psi disconnects himself. The Doctor does a brief tap dance in the middle of the floor.)
DOCTOR: He wants us to blow through the floor.
SAIBRA: Well, we'll die if we do that.
DOCTOR: Well, not necessarily. There must be a plan.
CLARA: What if the plan is, we're blowing up the floor for someone else? What if we're not supposed to make it out alive?
DOCTOR: Oh, don't be so pessimistic. It'll affect team morale.
SAIBRA: What, and getting us blown up won't?
DOCTOR: Well, only very, very briefly.
PSI: Er, no. No way. You can do you what you like. I'm going to take my chances out there.
CLARA: Psi.
PSI: No, no, no. This guy, your mate, is a lunatic.
DOCTOR: What do you want, Psi, more than anything else? Whatever it is, it's in this bank. You agreed to rob the most impregnable bank in history. You must have had a very good reason. We all must have. Picture the thing you want most in the universe, and decide how badly you want it. Well?
PSI: Still don't understand why you're in charge.
DOCTOR: Basically, it's the eyebrows.
(The Doctor has primed the device from the case. He puts it in the middle of the floor and it starts to build up power. Everyone grabs a piece of wall and waits. The power peaks, there's a brief flash, then the sound of distand machinery. They turn around and look down a hole in the floor. The Doctor picks up the bomb.)
DOCTOR: Nice. Dimensional shift bomb. Sends the particles to a different plane. Come on then, Team Not Dead.

[Outside the Deposit booth]

GUARD: Open up.
(The team are underneath the booth. The Doctor returns the floor particles to this plane just before the guards stride in and look around, baffled.)

[Basement]

SAIBRA: Well, so, what are we supposed to do now? What's the plan?
DOCTOR: I don't know. The Architect set all this up. It should make sense. My personal plan is that a thing will probably happen quite soon.
SAIBRA: Ah, so that's it. That's your plan?
DOCTOR: Yep.
SAIBRA: A thing will happen?
DOCTOR: A thing. Probably.
CLARA: Hey, Psi.
(Clara has spotted another case.)
CLARA: Doctor.
DOCTOR: There you go. Thing time.
CLARA: How does he get the cases here?
DOCTOR: By breaking into the bank in advance of breaking into the bank.
CLARA: Well, how did he do that? And if he can do that, why does he need us?
DOCTOR: Not our problem.
PSI: Well, what is our prob-prob-prob-prob-pr?
(Psi sounds like a stuck CD.)
CLARA: You okay?
PSI: Drive glitch. It's fine.
DOCTOR: Guilt is our problem. Guilt, in this bank, is fatal. The Teller can hear it. Ever since that first case was opened, we've been targets. The more we know about why we're here, the louder our guilt screams. That's why we wiped our memories. For our own safety. Now, once I open this, I can't close it again.
PSI: Would it be safer if only one of us learned it?
DOCTOR: I'm waiting for you to volunteer.
PSI: Er, why me?
DOCTOR: Because you didn't need that memory worm, did you? You're half-computer. You can perform a manual delete. You can clear your thoughts.
PSI: Okay.
(Psi carefully opens the case.)
PSI: I don't know what it is. You may as well have a look. Well, what are they?
(Six short tubes with metal ends, and pins that can be pulled out on top.)
DOCTOR: Not a clue.
SAIBRA: Hmm, interesting.
DOCTOR: What is?
SAIBRA: You're lying.
PSI: Er, why would he be lyi-lyi-lyi-lying? Ugh. Sorry. Stress. Drains the batteries.
DOCTOR: Interface with this.
(A wall console.)
SAIBRA: Do we have time for this?
DOCTOR: Well, why not? There's no immediate threat.
(An alarm sounds.)
COMPUTER: Warning. Intruders detected.
DOCTOR: I should stop saying things like that.
COMPUTER: Intruders detected.
DOCTOR: Clara, you stay with Psi. Saibra, let's go and investigate.
COMPUTER: Intru
(Psi jacks himself in to recharge, and blows dirt from a set of contacts on one of his removable chips.)
PSI: Oh. Storm dust.
CLARA: You can delete your memories?
PSI: Yeah, it's not as fun as it sounds.
CLARA: I've got a few I wish I could lose.
PSI: And I lost a few I wish I hadn't. No, I was, I was interrogated in prison. And I guess I panicked. I didn't want to be a risk to the people close to me, so
CLARA: You deleted your friends?
PSI: My friends, anyone who ever helped me, my family.
CLARA: Your family?
PSI: Of course my family.
CLARA: How could you do that?
PSI: Well, I don't know. (sighs) I suppose I must have loved them.

[Corridor]

(The Doctor kicks out a grill underneath a sign that says No Entry Under Any Circumstances, then helps Saibra out.)
DOCTOR: Aren't you going to ask me?
SAIBRA: Why did you lie? Those hardware things, you know what they are.
DOCTOR: Exit strategy of sorts. How did you know I was lying?
SAIBRA: I've had a lot of faces, I find them easy to read.
DOCTOR: Quite a gift.
SAIBRA: Gift?
DOCTOR: It got us in here.
SAIBRA: Mutant gene. No one can touch me. If they do, I transform. Touch me, Doctor, and you'll be looking at yourself. I am alone.
DOCTOR: Why?
SAIBRA: Could you trust someone who looked back at you out of your own eyes?
(They hear a moan, and follow the sound to a row of cells. Psi and Clara run and catch them up.)
CLARA: Oh, my God. Why is he even still alive?
(It is the customer with the caved in skull, being held up by chains manacled around his wrists. His is not the only occupied cell.)
DOCTOR: I don't know. But someone is watching.
(A red light is blinking nearby.)
PSI: Doctor. However this goes, whatever happens, don't let me end up like that.
(An alarm sounds.)
COMPUTER: Intruders on the service level. Intruders on the service level.
(They run to another No Entry etc grill and the Doctor sonicks it.)
DOCTOR: Now this says place to hide.

[Teller's room]

SAIBRA: Where are we?
(The Doctor peers at the Teller in its humid glass case, and it reacts. Can't really tell if the water droplets are inside or outside, sorry.)
DOCTOR: Nobody move. Nobody say a word. It's cocooned. Forced hibernation. Its power is probably dormant.
(There are running boots and voices outside. The Teller moves.)
DOCTOR: Clara. It's locked on to you. It may still be asleep. Don't wake it.
CLARA: Okay. How do I not do that?
DOCTOR: Keep your mind blank. Block everything. Once it locks onto your thoughts, it won't let go.
(The Teller growls gently. Clara closes her eyes.)
DOCTOR: It's waking up. Keep blocking your thoughts, Clara. Don't think.
(The creature roars.)
PSI: This way.
(Saibra sees legs running past another grill as the three return to the one they came through. Somehow she gets trapped, but I can't see how unless the creature somehow mentally grabbed her.)
SAIBRA: Oh.
PSI: Saibra!
CLARA: She's still in there. How do we get her out?
DOCTOR: It's scanning her brain.
PSI: Then what?
DOCTOR: Soup.
CLARA: Then help her.
(Saibra is in pain.)
DOCTOR: Saibra.
SAIBRA: What should I do? How can I get away?
DOCTOR: It's rooting through your brain. It's tasting all the secrets stashed inside. Any moment now, it will finish its sweep and start feasting on what's left.
SAIBRA: And then I become one of those things we saw sitting in a cage?
DOCTOR: Yes.
SAIBRA: Can you not get me out?
DOCTOR: I'm sorry. I don't know how, once it's locked onto your thoughts.
SAIBRA: Exit strategy. That means what I think it means, right?
(The Doctor holds out one of the tubes to her through the grill.)
DOCTOR: Atomic shredder.
SAIBRA: Painless?
DOCTOR: And instant.
SAIBRA: When you meet the Architect, promise me something. Kill him.
DOCTOR: I hate him, but I can't make that promise.
SAIBRA: A good man. I left it late to meet one of those.
(She uses the shredder, and vanishes in bright blue light. The Teller roars in frustration.)

[Outside the vault]

(They exit through another grill. A big round vault door is at the end of this corridor.)
DOCTOR: Right, vault. That's clear. What's not clear is what we do now.
CLARA: Hey. You okay?
DOCTOR: No, I'm an amnesiac robbing a bank. Why would I be okay?
CLARA: Because Saibra...
DOCTOR: What? Saibra is dead, we are alive. Prioritise if you want to stay that way.
PSI: Oh, is that why you call yourself the Doctor? The professional detachment.
DOCTOR: Listen. When we're done here, by all means, you go and find yourself a shoulder to cry on. You'll probably need that. Till then, what you need is me.
(The Doctor walks away towards the vault.)
CLARA: Underneath it all, he isn't really like that.
PSI: It's very obvious that you've been with him for a while.
CLARA: Why?
PSI: Because you are really good at the excuses.
(The Doctor finds a case in a computer access alcove by the vault door.)
DOCTOR: Another gift from the Architect. Shall we unwrap it?

[Teller's room]

(The escape route has been found.)
DELPHOX: The unbreakable bank. We must locate them. And Director Karabraxos must not know. When people get fired here, it's messy. Release the Teller into the tunnels.

[Outside the vault]

(Psi jacks himself into the small device in the case and downloads its contents. It hurts. He then goes into the computer access alcove while Clara looks at a printed card that was also in the case. TECH 251 ORG 339 PV)
PSI: Right, the system looks like it's time-delayed. There are twenty four lock codes I need to break.
(Growling.)
CLARA: Doctor? It's coming. We're trapped.
DOCTOR: Psi, how long?
PSI: As long as it takes.
DOCTOR: It's locked on to one of our thought trails. We have to split up, minimise the brain signals.
PSI: What happened to your professional detachment, Doctor?
(Psi holds out his hand, and the Doctor gives him one of the shredders.)
CLARA: No, no.
PSI: In case it finds me. It's my choice.
CLARA: You don't use that, okay? Promise me.
PSI: Time to run.
(Psi sits down to work.)

[Corridor]

DOCTOR: Separate.
(Clara and the Doctor go opposite ways through the maze of identical corridors. The Teller moves slowly.)

[Outside the vault]

COMPUTER: Vault locks opening. Vault locks opening. 24, 23, 22, 21, 20, 19, 18, 17
(As the computer counts down, the red lights around the outside of the circular door turn green. Psi unplugs himself and runs.)

[Corridor]

( Clara tries to hide as the Teller stomps nearer.)
DOCTOR [memory]: Keep your mind clear, Clara. Keep your mind blank.
(She can hear the Teller's heavy breathing nearby, so she tries to make a break for it. But as she runs past the creature, it grabs her with its mind.)
CLARA: Argh.
(The Doctor hears her cry.)
DOCTOR: Clara!
(Psi jacks into a wall.)
PSI [OC]: Come on! Come and find me!
(Psi is uploading or downloading images of criminals from history from the Bank's database, including a Sensorite from the First Doctor stories, Androvax from Sarah Jane Adventures, the Gunslinger, Captain John Hart, Skaldak the Time Warrior, a Slitheen, a Weevil and SJA's Trickster, along with mug shots of humans I don't recognise but someone might. Was one John Dillinger or similar? The Teller releases Clara.)
PSI: Every thief and villain in one big cocktail. I am so guilty! Every famous burglar in history is hiding in this bank right now in one body. Come and feast! Clara? For what it's worth, and it might not be worth much, when your whole life flashes in front of you, you see people you love and people missing you. Well, I see no one.
(Psi stands in front of the Teller and pulls the ring from the top of the shredder with his teeth, like a grenade. The Teller aims its beam at him, and he jabs himself with the shredder, then screams as he disappears. The Teller roars, and Clara runs.)

[Outside the vault]

COMPUTER: Three, two, one. Failed.
(Clara and the Doctor run back to see one red light left.)
COMPUTER: Vault unlocking failed.
(Clara tugs on the bars on the front of the door.)
CLARA: It's not opening. Psi. He died for nothing.
(The Doctor goes to the computer alcove and uses his screwdriver.)
DOCTOR: Multiple locks. Last one still in place.
(He opens up a nearby panel.)
DOCTOR: Atomic seal. Unbreakable, even for me. The Architect would know that. He wouldn't bring us all this way for nothing.
CLARA: And get two people killed.
DOCTOR: Exactly. There must be some logic.
CLARA: Some logic?
DOCTOR: Come on, Architect. What else have you got?
(Thunder outside.)

[Office]

DELPHOX: Report, please. What was the disturbance?

[Banking hall]

GUARD: Solar storm. Getting worse. Interfering with our systems.
(This planet is so close to its sun that there is no time delay between the flare leaving the star and hitting the atmosphere.)

[Outside the vault]

DOCTOR: A storm. The storm's tripping the system. That's what he's got, a storm.
CLARA: How would he know when a storm would hit?
DOCTOR: (laughs) Of course. Stupid, stupid Doctor. Of course, of course.
CLARA: Of course, what?
DOCTOR: Whoever planned all this, they're in the future. This isn't just a bank heist, it's a time travel heist. We've been sent back in time to the exact moment of the storm, to be in exactly the right place when it hits, because that's the only time the bank is vulnerable.
COMPUTER: Vault unlocked.
(The big door swings open.)
DOCTOR: The bank is now open.
COMPUTER: Vault unlocked.
DOCTOR: Come on.

[Vault]

(They step inside the golden vault lined with safety deposit boxes.)< br>DOCTOR: It explains why we're not here in the Tardis.
CLARA: Sorry, what?
DOCTOR: The solar disruption would have made navigation impossible. The one time the bank is vulnerable is the one time we can't just land.
CLARA: Doctor? The code. The code that was in the last case. Look. Tech.
DOCTOR: Technology. 251. Find it.
(They hunt amongst the myriad of racks. Clara finds the right section.)
CLARA: Tech.
(They don't need a key to open the box. The Doctor opens the small case inside. It looks like a fat hypodermic syringe.)
DOCTOR: It's a neophyte circuit. (It lights up blue.) I've only ever seen one once before. It can reboot any system, replace any lost data.
CLARA: Psi. That's what he came for, his reward.
DOCTOR: So what did Saibra come for?
(ORG 339 contains a bottle.)
DOCTOR: Gene suppressant.
CLARA: She wanted to be normal.
DOCTOR: Everyone has a weakness. So the big question is this. What did we come for?
CLARA: PV.
DOCTOR: Private vault. Karabraxos's own fortune?
(The Doctor walks around the rack of boxes and straight into the Teller.)

[Office]

(Two armoured guards stand behind the Doctor and Clara. One has kept his helmet on. The Teller is also there.)
DELPHOX: Intruders are most welcome. They remind us that the bank is impregnable. It's good for morale to have a few of you scattered about the place, preferably on view.
(CCTV images of the brain-dead in the cells are on a section of the wall.)
DELPHOX: Are you ready for your close-up? If you're thinking of ways to escape, the Teller will know before you've even made a move. You'll never be bothered by all that thinking again.
DOCTOR: Useful species.
DELPHOX: Last of its kind, and we've signed an exclusive deal.
DOCTOR: Must be noisy inside its head. Painful to listen to so much chatter, so many secrets. Must drive it wild. How can you force it to obey?
DELPHOX: Oh, everything has a price tag, I think you'll find.
(The storm rages overhead.)
DELPHOX: The storm's getting worse. The customers are leaving. Director Karabraxos will be concerned. Our jobs will be on the line.
DOCTOR: You're scared.
DELPHOX: Oh, I'm terrified. I have the disadvantage of knowing Karabraxos personally.
DOCTOR: If you don't like your boss, why stay?
DELPHOX: My face fits. Now if you'll excuse me, I must take the Teller to its hibernation. You two, dispose of our guests.
(Delphox and the Teller leave, and the door closes behind them. The guards push Clara and the Doctor up against the wall.)
DOCTOR: Don't do this. I'm having a very bad day, and I do not want to be pushed around.
BEARDED GUARD: You're wrong.
DOCTOR: Wrong?
BEARDED GUARD: It's not that bad a day. And you're being very slow.
DOCTOR: Why are you undoing my handcuffs?
(The bearded guard transforms into - )
DOCTOR: Saibra?
(The guard with the helmet on speaks.)
PSI: It looked like death. (he takes it off.) It was actually a teleporter.
(Clara hugs him.)
CLARA: Oh, my God.
PSI: Good, eh? You think we're dead, so the Teller thinks we're dead, and we play the creature at his own mind games.
DOCTOR: No, no. Wait, wait, wait, wait. What? Sorry, sorry, what? You, you, you're, you're alive?
SAIBRA: Yeah, we're alive. Look at us. We're all alive.
DOCTOR: No, no, no, no. Not dead. Alive.
PSI: There's an escape ship in orbit. Takes you right there. Oh, and there's this big blue box. Is that yours?
DOCTOR: Well, this is good, I suppose. You'll be able to resume the mission. Gene suppressant. Antidote for your condition.
(Saibra takes the bottle from the Doctor.)
DOCTOR: Memory giver. All your yesterdays.
(Psi takes it.)
DOCTOR: There you go. Job done, paid in full. Clever old Architect.
SAIBRA: Very clever.
DOCTOR: I still hate him.
SAIBRA: Me too.
PSI: How were you paid?
DOCTOR: I don't know. There's something in the private vault.

[Basement]

DOCTOR: What's that?
PSI: Supply line. It's the only oxygen down to the private vault. There's another one for water, for basic life support.
CLARA: What, for a private vault?
DOCTOR: Someone likes to hang out with their wealth.

[Private vault]

(We look around the vault whilst listening to the Overture To The Abduction From The Seraglio by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, K384. Lots of small statuary around the place including a Buddha, Tutankamun's golden coffin. The team enter through a grill, of course.)
DOCTOR: Director Karabraxos? Excuse us, but we've come to rob you. So if you want to put your hands above your head, or
(The richly embroidered high backed chair spins round to reveal a woman identical to Ms Delphox with her hands up. The music ends.)
KARABRAXOS: Or? You didn't bring any weapons. That's a bit of an oversight. Security, Karabraxos here.
DOCTOR: You're Karabraxos?
KARABRAXOS: One moment.
DELPHOX [on monitor]: Director Karabraxos, is there a problem?
KARABRAXOS: Intruders in the private vault. Send me the Teller. I want to find out how they got in, and then I want to wipe their memories.
DOCTOR: She's a clone.
KARABRAXOS: It's the only way to control my own security. I have a clone in every facility. Get on it right away.
DELPHOX [on monitor]: Yes, of course.
KARABRAXOS: And then hand in your credentials. You're fired, with immediate effect.
DELPHOX [on monitor]: But please, I've been in your service
KARABRAXOS: Ever since the last one let me down and I was forced to kill it. I can't quite believe that you're putting me through this again.
(Transmission ends.)
KARABRAXOS: My clone. And yet she doesn't even protest. Pale imitation, really. Ha! I should sue.
CLARA: You're killing her? You just said
KARABRAXOS: Fired? I put all of the used clones into the incinerator. Can't have to many of moi scattered around.
PSI: Sorry, you don't get on with your own clone?
DOCTOR: She hates her own clones. She burns her own clones. Frankly, you're a career break for the right therapist. Shut up. Everybody, just, just shut up.
KARABRAXOS: And what is this display now, as amusing as you are?
DOCTOR: Shut up. Just shut up, shut up, shut up, shutetty up up up. What, what did you say? What did you say? What did you say about your own eyes? De-shut up. Say it again.
SAIBRA: How can you trust someone if they look back at you out of your own eyes?
DOCTOR: I know one thing about the Architect. What is it that I know about the Architect? I know one thing. Something that I've known from the very start.
CLARA: What?
DOCTOR: I hate him. He's overbearing, he's manipulative, he likes to think that he's very clever. I hate him! Clara, don't you see?
(He strikes a handy gong.)
DOCTOR: I hate the Architect.
KARABRAXOS: What in the name of sanity is going on in this room now?
DOCTOR: We're getting sanity judgment from the self-burner. Do you mind if I borrow a little bit of paper?
KARABRAXOS: And what are you doing now?
DOCTOR: I'm giving you my telephone number.
KARABRAXOS: Why?
(He folds the paper over and writes on the outside, too.)
DOCTOR: Well, I thought you might like to call me someday.
(It says, I Am A Time Traveller.)
DOCTOR: Sorry, I thought we were getting along famously. Am I, like, misreading the signals or something?
(The solar storm rattles the building.)
DOCTOR: Oh, that was a big one, wasn't it? I think that your bank is about to close for good, Karabraxos. If I was you, I'd get going. Don't mind us, we'll just stay here and burn.
(The alarm sounds as the solar flare sweeps across the planet and the Bank. The customers panic. Karabraxos is packing a bag. A Faberg egg?)
DOCTOR: Hard to know what to take. The greatest treasures of the universe in just one suitcase.
(The building shakes again.)
CLARA: Doctor, what's the plan? Is there a plan?
SAIBRA: We can use the shredders and get us back to the ship.
DOCTOR: They're not shredders, they're teleports, and that's not the most interesting thing about them.
SAIBRA: So what is?
DOCTOR: There were six of them. Hey. Give me a call me some time.
COMPUTER: Doors opening.
KARABRAXOS: You'll be dead.
DOCTOR: Yeah, you'll be old. We'll get on famously. You'll be old and full of regret for the things that you can't change.
(Karabraxos gets into her personal lift.)
COMPUTER: Doors closing.
(The Doctor makes a phone me gesture.)
PSI: Doctor, what the hell is going on?
CLARA: Are you remembering?
DOCTOR: No, not a thing. But I'm understanding.
CLARA: What? What is it? What are you understanding?
DOCTOR: I'm not sure yet. I need my memory back. And I think there's only one way to do that.
CLARA: Which would be?
DOCTOR: Soup.
CLARA: Soup?
(Ding! The lift doors open and the Teller enters.)
DOCTOR: Hello, big man. Peckish?
(The Teller grabs the Doctor's mind with its own.)
CLARA: Doctor!
(The pain drives the Doctor to his knees.)
DOCTOR: No, no. Let it take me. Let it read me. It's the only way.
CLARA: It will kill you.
DOCTOR: What have I told you about pessimism? That's it, that's it. There are so many memories in here. Feast on them. Tuck in. Big scarf, bow tie, bit embarrassing. What do you think of the new look? I was hoping for minimalism, but I think I came up with magician. In the last few days, there's been a block. Can you see the block? Tell me why I'm here. Show me why I'm here. Show me!

[Clara's flat]

DOCTOR: It's just a phone, Clara. Nothing happens when you answer the phone.

[Bedroom / Clara's flat]

(An old woman lying in a bed is on the other end of the line, hooked up to various monitoring devices.)
KARABRAXOS: Doctor?
DOCTOR: Hello?
KARABRAXOS: You gave me this number. My name is Madame Karabraxos. I was once the wealthiest person in the Universe. I need your assistance. I'm dying, with many, many regrets. But one, perhaps, you may be able to help me with.

[Clara's flat]

(The Doctor replaces the receiver.)
DOCTOR: It's a little detour. It's a, it's a job, I've got to do it for someone. Come on.

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: We need to rob a bank.
CLARA: What?
DOCTOR: Clara, I need worms.
(He sets the time rotor going and scrolls through various faces, including Psi, Saibra, and Mister Porrima, with whom he shakes hands then transfers the skin cells to the device in the first case.)
DOCTOR: The Bank of Karabraxos has never been breached.
(Saibra and Psi delete their memories, then Clara strokes the worm.)
DOCTOR: Architect.
(He works to disguise his voice.)
TARDIS AUDIO: Architect.
DOCTOR: Architect.
TARDIS AUDIO: Architect.
DOCTOR: Architect.
TARDIS AUDIO: Architect.
DOCTOR: Architect.
(Then he places the cases where they will be found later / earlier in the show.)
DOCTOR: You will rob the Bank of Karabraxos.
(And reveals himself to be the shadow in the hooded top.)

[Private vault]

(The Teller releases the Doctor.)
DOCTOR: Did you see why we came? Why we're here? We had to delete our own memories, otherwise you'd have known, and then she'd have known, because you were mentally linked. But she's gone now. They've all gone. They have no power over you now. You can do exactly what you want to do now. Exactly what you've always wanted to do.
(A small lock turns on the wall.)
PSI: It knows the combination.
DOCTOR: Of course it does. It was linked to Karabraxos.
CLARA: What exactly are we doing here? That thing killed people.
DOCTOR: Well so might you do, to protect everything you loved.
(The safe door swings open to reveal a second creature in a straight jacket. It wails.)
DOCTOR: There she is. Not the last of its species. The last two.
(Psi works to unchain her.)
DOCTOR: It's okay, it's okay. It's all right.
SAIBRA: Exit strategy. We've got six shredders.
DOCTOR: Exactly. This wasn't a bank heist. It never was. It was rescue mission for a whole species. Flesh and blood, the last currency.
(The lights flicker.)
DOCTOR: Time to go home. What do you think of that, big man?
(A big roar.)

[Planet surface]

DOCTOR: So much mental traffic in the universe. Solitude is the only peace.
(Freed of their clothing and restraints, the two telepathic beings walk off together.)

[Tardis]

(In flight, eating take-out with chopsticks.)
DOCTOR: Gioffre Borgia, mucho scary hombre, says to me, what do you think of our Leaning Tower of Pisa? I say, (leans sideways) it looks okay to me.
(Laughter. Later, saying goodbye.)
PSI: If you ever need help with another bank heist...
(The Doctor shakes Psi's hand, Clara hugs him.)
CLARA: Yeah, it's not really his area.
(The Doctor makes the Phone Me sign. Psi leaves. Later, Saibra hugs the Doctor.)
SAIBRA: See? I don't have your face now.
DOCTOR: Yeah. I kind of miss that.
SAIBRA: Oh, shut up.
(Saibra leave the Tardis. The Doctor rubs his arm where Saibra had squeezed him. And finally -)
DOCTOR: 7.12, local time, as promised. Go and enjoy yourself. Don't do anything I wouldn't do.
CLARA: It's a date. You know, I've just realised. I'm going out for another meal now.
DOCTOR: Don't worry. Calories consumed on the Tardis have no lasting effect.
CLARA: What? Are you kidding?.
DOCTOR: Of course I'm kidding. It's a time machine, not a miracle worker. Bye, bye.
CLARA: See you. Don't rob any banks.
DOCTOR: Don't rob any banks what?
CLARA: Without me.
DOCTOR: Course not, boss.
(Clara leaves.)
DOCTOR: Robbing a bank. Robbing a whole bank. Beat that for a date.

[Alien planet]

(With wickedly sharp rocky outcrops sticking sideways out of the desert ground. The Doctor and Clara are chained to ornately carved pillars as twin suns beat down.)
CLARA: There's no way out of this. We're going to die here.
DOCTOR: Pass me the vibro-cutters.
CLARA: They're in my pocket.
DOCTOR: Come on then, pass them to me.
CLARA: In my other jacket. At home.
DOCTOR: Why have you got two jackets? Is one of them faulty?
CLARA: Look, I don't have the vibro-cutters. If I had the vibro-cutters, I wouldn't be able to pass you the vibro-cutters. We're going to starve to death out here.
DOCTOR: Of course we won't starve. The sand piranhas will get us long before that.

[Pub]

(Clara enters and goes to Danny's table.)
CLARA: Hiya. Sorry I'm late.
(They kiss.)
DANNY: You're not. You're brown. You're very brown. You weren't that brown this morning.
CLARA: Sunbed. I'll get 'em in. Usual?

[Clara's flat]

(Clara is about to go out when the Doctor pops his head out of the Tardis.)
DOCTOR: Fish people.
CLARA: What are they like?
DOCTOR: Fish. And people. Come and see.

[Taxi]

CLARA: How's you?
DANNY: Evening. Nice frock. It's a bit wet.
CLARA: Freak shower.
DANNY: Is that seaweed?
CLARA: I said freak.

[Corridor]

(Running as lasers are shot at them.)
CLARA: How much further?
DOCTOR: Tardis has got to be round this corner. I hate soldiers. Don't you hate soldiers?
CLARA: Yeah.
DOCTOR: Just keep running!

[Clara's flat]

(She opens the front door to see -)
CLARA: Oh, yeah. Danny. Hiya.
DANNY: Morning. Ready to run?
CLARA: Mmm hmm.

[Clara's bedroom]

(Clara is out of breath and completely drenched in sweat.)
CLARA: I can't keep doing this. I can't do it. Yes, I can, I can do it, of course I can do it. I've got it all under control.

[Tardis]

(Clara enters from her living room.)
CLARA: So, where we off to?
DOCTOR: Clara, you, you look lovely today. Have you had a wash?
CLARA: Why are you being nice?
DOCTOR: Because it works on you. Listen, I'm sorry but there's going to be no trip today. I'm sorry. Er, I've got to do a thing. It might take a while.
CLARA: What thing?
(He keeps the scanner with the flashing red light out of her view.)
DOCTOR: Just a thing.
CLARA: You're being mysterious, and do you know what means?
DOCTOR: I'm a man of mystery.
CLARA: Hmm. It means that you are a very clever man making the mistake, common to very clever people, of assuming that everybody else is stupid. Where are you going?
(She grabs the scanner and he switches it to the view of the galaxy.)
DOCTOR: Undercover. Deep cover.
CLARA: Can you do deep cover?
DOCTOR: What do you mean?
CLARA: Have you seen you?
DOCTOR: Of course I can do deep cover.
CLARA: (giggling) Where, the Magic Circle?
(The Doctor snaps his fingers, and the Tardis doors open.)
DOCTOR: I'll see you when I see you.
(Clara snaps her fingers, and they close again.)
CLARA: When's that?
(Snap, open.)
DOCTOR: When I see you.
CLARA: Hmm. Hmm. I'll be sure to have a wash.
DOCTOR: Excellent. I was meaning to bring it up.
(Clara leaves, shutting the doors then opening them again and pointing meaningfully at her eye before finally leaving. The Doctor calls up the glowing area on the map which is on the scanner - East London.)

[Playground]

(The boys are playing football where they shouldn't as the teachers arrive.)
TEACHER: You lot! Not here. Over there.
COURTNEY: Morning, Mister Pink.
DANNY: Morning, Courtney. And good morning, Miss Oswald.
CLARA: Morning, Mister Pink.
(The group of girls by the entrance giggle.)

[School corridor]

CLARA: Do they know?
DANNY: Possibly. They're children. It's like they've got minds of their own. Are you okay?
CLARA: Yeah, course I'm okay. Why wouldn't I be okay?
DANNY: I dunno. Every time I see you, it's like you're
CLARA: What?
DANNY: In a rush. In a state. In a space helmet, one time.
CLARA: Sorry. Er, I've had a thing and, er, the thing's gone, so I'm all yours.
DANNY: What thing? What's gone?
CLARA: Nothing.
DANNY: It's like you're trying to be mysterious. I'm not stupid, you know.
CLARA: The next few days are all about you. I promise.
(Clara moves in closer, but pupils giggle at the end of the corridor, so she walks away.)

[Staff room]

ARMITAGE: Which means, Jo, you'll have to cover for 8/4M in L3. Hold on, there is just one more thing. Atif's off sick, so we've got a newbie, I did ask him to come along.
(Knocking on the door.)
ARMITAGE: Ah, here he is.
(A tall figure in a brown coverall and holding a broom enters.)
DOCTOR: I'm the new caretaker. John Smith.
DANNY: Welcome to Coal Hill, Mister Smith.
DOCTOR: Thanks. Yes, John Smith's the name. But, you know, here's a thing. Most people just call me the Doctor.
(He winks at Clara.)
DOCTOR: So, if anybody needs me, just, you know, give me a shout. I'll be in the storeroom just getting the lie of the land.
(The staff leave the room.)
DOCTOR: Yes, no body's taking any notice at all. Absolutely good news because it means I must be coming across just as an absolutely boring human being like you.
(Clara mouths What are you doing here? He shuts the door on her.)
DOCTOR: Deep cover. Deep cover.

[School corridor]

DANNY: Do you know him?
CLARA: Know who?
DANNY: The caretaker, Smith. The Doctor.
CLARA: Never seen him before in my life.
DANNY: Bit intense looking. Did you see those eyebrows? Did he wink at you?
CLARA: No, I think that was just a sort of general wink, you know? He winked at everybody. It was a general welcoming wink. Ah, I have, er, left some marking. Assembly. Chop-chop. Off you pop. Catch you in a bit. Excuse me.

[Staff room]

(The Doctor is looking at a plan of the school buildings. He crumples it into his pocket when Clara enters.)
DOCTOR: So, you recognised me, then.
CLARA: You're wearing a different coat.
DOCTOR: But you saw straight through that.
CLARA: Deep cover in my school? Why? Where's Atif, what have you done with him?
(The Doctor wards her off with his broom.)
DOCTOR: He's fine. Hypnotised. He thinks he's got the 'flu. Also a flying car and three wives. It's going to be a rude awakening.
CLARA: Is it aliens? Oh, my God, is that why you're here? Are there aliens?
DOCTOR: It's assembly. You'd better get going. Go and worship something.
CLARA: Are there aliens in this school?
DOCTOR: Listen, it's lovely talking to you, but I've really got to get on. I'm a caretaker now. Look, I've got a brush.
CLARA: Doctor, is there an alien in this school?
DOCTOR: Yes, me. Now, go. The walls need sponging and there's a sinister puddle.
CLARA: You can't do this. You cannot pass yourself off as a real person among actual people.
DOCTOR: I lived among otters once for a month. Well, I sulked. River and I, we had this big fight
CLARA: Human beings are not otters!
DOCTOR: Exactly. It'll be even easier.
CLARA: Okay. One question. And you will answer this question. Are the kids safe?
DOCTOR: No. Nobody is safe. But soon the answer will be yes, everybody is safe, if you let me get on. Now, pretend you don't know me. Stay out of my way. The less you know, the better. I'll explain it all later. Go and sing with the otters.
CLARA: I hate you.
DOCTOR: That's fine. That's a perfectly normal reaction.

[Street]

(Two schoolboys are playing a video game by a large wrought iron gate.)
NOAH: Basically, you've to get that guy on the block and stop that other one shooting him. It's so sick.
YASHE: I, I got that guy. That was, like, six months ago. You actually have to do is flick it that way.
NOAH: Nah, but I'm saying
(A Community Support Officer approaches them.)
MATTHEW: You Coal Hill kids?
NOAH: Yeah? So what if we are?
MATTHEW: Then get to Coal Hill.
YASHE: We've got a free period, mate.
MATTHEW: You want me to take your names?
YASHE: Come on. This is unfair, mate.
(Something rattles on the other side of the gate.)
MATTHEW: Always come in threes. Oi! I know you're in there.

[Old building]

(He goes through the creaky gate and pries a piece of corrugated iron off the main door to the old building.)
MATTHEW: Hello? I'm a police officer. There's no point hiding. Do you hear me? Come on, kiddo.
BLITZER: Five stop intruder. Five stop intruder.
MATTHEW: Turn your game off. It's time for school. Come on. Stop messing about!
(Something with bright blue eyes is watching Matthew with yellow and purple vision. A mechanical device trundles into the light from Matthew's torch.)
BLITZER: Problem solution destroy.
(Matthew screams as the bullets rip through him. We see a smoking severed hand land on the floor. No wonder this story was scheduled for later than usual.)

[English class]

(Clara's bored class are reading Pride and Prejudice out loud.)
KELVIN: Though unheard by Lydia, was caught by Elizabeth, and as it assured her that Darcy was not
(The Doctor climbs a ladder to the open window at the back of the classroom. Clara gets up from behind her desk.)
KELVIN: You all right, Miss Oswald?
CLARA: Yes, Kelvin, I'm fine. You carry on.
KELVIN: Every feeling of displeasure against the former was so sharpened 
(They are on the second floor. Clara stands on a chair to talk to the Doctor.)
CLARA: Can I help you, Mister Smith?
DOCTOR: Wrong.
CLARA: I'm sorry?
DOCTOR: On the board. Wrong. Wrong.
(The famous Jane Austen quote 1797 It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife.)
CLARA: Oh, no, no, no, no. You don't do this. You are the caretaker, this is not what you do.
DOCTOR: Just taking care.
CLARA: Not your area!
DOCTOR: Jane Austen wrote Pride and Prejudice in 1796.
(Clara clears her throat then addresses the class.)
CLARA: This is Mister Smith, the temporary caretaker, and he's a bit confused.
DOCTOR: Not in 1797, because she didn't have the time. She was so busy doing all
CLARA: Oh, What? I suppose she was your bezzie mate, was she? And you went on holidays together and then you got kidnapped by Boggons from space and then you all formed a band and met Buddy Holly.
DOCTOR: No, I read the book. There's a bio at the back.
(The children giggle.)
CLARA: Get down.
DOCTOR: Boggons?
CLARA: Go.
(The school bell rings.)
CLARA: Right, that's it. Well done, Kelvin. Get going. See you all in a couple of days. Thanks very much.
KELVIN: Miss, what about our homework?
CLARA: Who asks for homework? Amateur.

[School corridor]

(The Doctor is working on a junction cabinet in the courtyard garden and chatting with Danny and another male teacher, who has floppy hair and wears a bow tie. Clara is stopped by a tall schoolboy.)
TOBIAS: Miss Oswald
CLARA: Hello, Tobias, can't really stop.
TOBIAS: I'm in the football team against Durrants on Thursday. Sorry, but can I go early from English Thursday afternoon?
CLARA: Tobias, you can do whatever you want.
(And then the Headmaster.)
ARMITAGE: Ah, Clara, can I grab a quick word?
CLARA: Actually, I, er yes.
ARMITAGE: Two weeks Saturday, the fete, can I put you down for tombola and the raffle? James H can't cover it now. His wife's going into hospital. Hip replacement. Constant agony. CLARA: Great. No, awful. That's terrible. Awful. I hope she'll be okay. Er, I'll do anything. Anything. Okay, bye.

[Courtyard]

COURTNEY: Miss Oswald, Katie Sharps says I pulled her hair in Biology.
CLARA: Courtney, you are big enough to look after yourself. Next class, jog on, I need to talk to Mister Pink.
COURTNEY: Ozzie loves the Squaddie.
CLARA: What was that?
COURTNEY: Nothing.
ADRIAN: Of course, Danny Pink here is your man, Mister Smith. Five years' military experience, sergeant, here and Afghan, so electrics, boilers, if you need a hand, give him a shout.
(Clara takes a watering can from a girl and uses it as an excuse to overhear the conversation.)
DANNY: I, I've helped Atif with a couple of things.
DOCTOR: I'm sure I won't need you, Sergeant. Fully qualified. (sparks) You best get back to your PE class.
DANNY: Oh, I teach maths.
DOCTOR: Do you? What, in emergencies?
DANNY: No. I'm a maths teacher.
ADRIAN: Yeah, he's a maths teacher
(Glass breaks.)
ADRIAN: Mohammed, put that down!
(He leaves.)
DOCTOR: How does that work? What if the kids have questions?
DANNY: About what?
DOCTOR: Maths.
DANNY: I answer them. I'm a maths teacher.
DOCTOR: But he said you were a soldier.
DANNY: Yeah. I was a soldier, now I'm a maths teacher.
DOCTOR: But what about all the PE?
DANNY: I don't teach PE. I'm not a PE teacher.
DOCTOR: Sorry, that seems very unlikely.
CLARA: Er, excuse me. Mister Pink, I think class 9M4 are waiting.
DOCTOR: Yes, you better run along, Sergeant. That ball isn't going to kick itself, is it?
DANNY: I, I'm not a PE teacher, I'm a maths teacher.
DOCTOR: Nope, sorry. No, I can't retain that. I've tried. It's just not going in.
(Danny leaves.)
CLARA: So, Pink? The name remind you of anything?
DOCTOR: Yeah. The colour.
CLARA: Colonel Orson Pink? The guy we met at the end of the universe.
DOCTOR: Oh, yeah. Okay, yeah. Same name, doesn't look anything like him though.
CLARA: Looks very like him.
DOCTOR: Does he? I don't know. Who remembers a PE teacher?
(The Doctor places a gizmo with three green lights in the the cabinet he was working in, then locks it up.)
CLARA: Oh, never mind. What are you doing? What, what's in there?
DOCTOR: So, is he here then?
CLARA: Is who here?
DOCTOR: The one that you keep going on serious dates with.
CLARA: If he is, are you going to start talking like a normal human being?
DOCTOR: I promise I won't. I'm being nice.
CLARA: Doctor
ADRIAN: Clara. Got this period free, yes?
CLARA: No. Yes.
ADRIAN: Great. Shakespeare.
CLARA: Sorry, what, Adrian?
DOCTOR: Oh, I see.
CLARA: You see what?
DOCTOR: Nothing. Nothing at all.
ADRIAN: Excuse me. We have to talk about The Tempest.

[School corridor]

ADRIAN: In light of the changes to the sixth form Shakespeare module, blah-de-blah.
CLARA: Yes, sorry, of course.
(They turn and look at the Doctor, who is following them.)
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, no, of course, of course, yes. Don't mind this old man. You two kids just pop off together.
CLARA: Why are you talking like an idiot?
DOCTOR: I'm a caretaker. Don't mind me.
ADRIAN: What we have to get across, I feel, is that fascinating enigma of its not-finishedness.
CLARA: Mmm, yes, good point, Ade.
DOCTOR: (sotto) Oh, Clara.
(The Doctor carries on taking care around the school, putting his green light gizmos on the lights in the corridors. He sees a piece of graffiti on a window - Ozzie loves the Squaddie.)
DOCTOR: What does that mean? Kids. What's the matter with kids today?
(He wipes it off.)

[Playground]

(Another gizmo goes inside a drain grating. Part of the playground has a large chessboard painted on it, with corresponding sized pieces.)
BOY [OC]: Shoot! Yes!
(A black rook is knocked over by a football.)
CLARA: Hey, I said you could play chess, I did not say you could play football on the chessboard. Jack, Morgan, come on, help me out, clear it up.
(The Doctor whistles We Don't Need No Education, from Pink Floyd's The Wall.)

[Outside the Caretaker's storeroom]

DOCTOR: And one for luck.
(A gizmo goes into the hanging basket by the door.)

[Caretaker's storeroom]

(Where the Tardis is parked.)
DOCTOR: Okay. Now we're in business. Let's see the lie of the land. Time to see what's going on.
(He goes into the Tardis, and a green light floods out of it. Courtney enters the storeroom.)
COURTNEY: Hello? Oi. What are you doing? Are you in there?
DOCTOR [OC]: Mirror, mirror on the wall, who's the most dangerous of them all?
(The green light goes out.)
COURTNEY: There's been a spillage in Geography, I need some paper towels.
(Doctor comes out of the Tardis.)
DOCTOR: Can't you read?
COURTNEY: Course I can read. Read what?
DOCTOR: The door. It says, Keep Out.
COURTNEY: No, it says, Go Away Humans.
DOCTOR: Oh, so it does. Never lose your temper in the middle of a door sign.
COURTNEY: What was you doing in there? What's that box?
DOCTOR: The caretaker's box. Every caretaker has their own box.
COURTNEY: It says Police.
DOCTOR: Exactly, there's a policeman in there, in case of emergencies and children. Towels, there, g-g-go.
COURTNEY: What was that green glow? There was a green glow coming from in there. What was it?
DOCTOR: Of course there was. What's a policeman without a death ray?
(School bell.)
DOCTOR: Oh, listen, there's the bell. Off you go. Haven't you got shoplifting to go to?
COURTNEY: I'm going to tell the Headmaster.
DOCTOR: Oh, yes, fine. Well, cut along, you're running out of time.
COURTNEY: For what?
DOCTOR: Everything. Human beings have incredibly short life spans. Frankly, you should all be in a permanent state of panic. Tick tock, tick tock.
COURTNEY: You're weird.
DOCTOR: Yes, I am. What about you?
COURTNEY: I'm a disruptive influence.
DOCTOR: Good to meet you.
COURTNEY: And you.
(They shake hands.)
DOCTOR: Now get lost.
COURTNEY: Okay.
(Courtney leaves as Clara enters.)
COURTNEY: Hello, miss. Love to the Squaddie.
CLARA: Sorry, what did you say? What was she doing in here?
DOCTOR: Paper towels. Now, I imagine you have many questions. Fire away. I won't answer any of them.
CLARA: What were they like?
DOCTOR: What were who like?
CLARA: The others before me. Did they let you get away with this kind of thing? This school is in danger.
DOCTOR: Well, it's lucky I'm here, then.
CLARA: From you.
DOCTOR: Me?
CLARA: You wouldn't be here if there wasn't an alien threat nearby. Your strategy for dealing with it involves endangering this school.
DOCTOR: You don't know that.
CLARA: I don't know anything because you haven't told me anything, which means I wouldn't approve, which means you are endangering this school.
(The Doctor activates his sonic screwdriver and reveals a green glowing globe.)
CLARA: What's that?
DOCTOR: It's a scanner. I'm scanning. Why do I keep you around?
CLARA: Because the alternative would be developing a conscience of your own. Scanning for what?
DOCTOR: Any alien technology in this vicinity should show up. I used to have a teacher exactly like you once.
CLARA: You still do. Pay attention.
(The scanner displays a four legged machine which looks a wheelchair with an alien sitting in it. If you have seen Falling Skies, think skitter.)
CLARA: What the hell is it?
DOCTOR: A Skovox Blitzer. One of the deadliest killing machines ever created. Probably homed in here because of artron emissions. You've had enough of them in this area over the years. There's enough explosive in its armoury to take out the whole planet.
(For those who don't know, time travellers absorb artron energy as they go through the Time Vortex, and it might be a Tardis power source - see Four to Doomsday. The Doctor's granddaughter went to Coal Hill school, and his first companions were teachers there.)
CLARA: Then leave it alone.
DOCTOR: Sooner or later it will creep from its hidey-hole and some military idiot will try to attack it.
(He turns off the image.)
DOCTOR: The world is full of PE teachers.

[Tardis]

CLARA: So, your insanely dangerous plan is?
(The Doctor holds up a digital wrist watch with an expanding metal bracelet.)
CLARA: A new watch. Tiny bit disappointed.
DOCTOR: This is a very special watch.
(The Doctor puts it on, presses a button and vanishes.)
CLARA: Doctor? Oi! Ow! Did you just flick my nose? You're invisible. Ha, ha! Oh, my God, that's incredible.
DOCTOR [OC]: Correct. I am invisible and I am incredible. It's simply a matter of reversing light waves. Hang on, I'm coming back.
CLARA: All right, where are you?
(The Doctor reappears.)
DOCTOR: So, I give the Blitzer a tiny whiff of non-threatening alien tech, I lead it back here, but I don't want it to scan me, hence invisible.
CLARA: So you're, you're leading the thing here? To a school? My, my school?
DOCTOR: My school? Oh, that is telling. This is the only suitably empty place in the area. I've set up a circle of time mines around the school. Chronodyne generators. Bit unstable.
(He throws one of his little gizmos to Clara.)
DOCTOR: I switch them on, the Blitzer gets sucked into a big old time vortex, billions of years into the future. It's dead easy. Tiny bit boring. I'll need a book and a sandwich.
CLARA: And me. You're not doing this alone.
(She gives him the gizmo back.)
DOCTOR: I don't need you this time. I'll see you tomorrow. We'll go somewhere nice. Ancient Egypt. Crocodilopolis. They worship a big crocodile there, so the name is a useful coincidence. Go and canoodle with your boyfriend. Come on. I wasn't born yesterday. Far from it.
CLARA: You did recognise him.  
DOCTOR: Possibly reminded me of a certain dashing young time traveller.
CLARA: Oh, of course you recognised him. I. Sorry. Stupid. I, I underestimated you.
DOCTOR: It's easily done. There's a lot to estimate.
CLARA: And you, you like him?
DOCTOR: Yes, I like him very, very much. Go home and canoodle. Doctor's orders. Come on.
CLARA: Just this once, I'm doing what I'm told.
DOCTOR: Oh, sing hosanna.
CLARA: Ah. So easy.

[Playground]

DANNY: Miss Oswald.
CLARA: Ah, Mister, Mister Pink.
DANNY: Are you still on for tonight? Cos you had your I'm about to cancel frown on.
CLARA: There's a specific frown?
DANNY: And I was going to say, it's okay, I might have a thing, so .
CLARA: A thing?
DANNY: Er, tomorrow instead?
CLARA: Tomorrow's parents' evening.
DANNY: Not all evening.
CLARA: No. Not all evening.
(The Doctor comes out of his storeroom.)
DANNY: What do you think of him?
CLARA: Er, who? The caretaker?
DANNY: Where did he come from? What was he before? He doesn't seem like a caretaker.
CLARA: Well, he speaks very highly of you.
DANNY: Anyway. Good night, Miss Oswald.
CLARA: Good night, Mister Pink.

[School]

(Night. The Doctor comes out of the main doors and turns on his screwdriver.)
DOCTOR: And we're off.
(As the Doctor goes in search of the Blitzer, Danny finds a little gizmo blinking green underneath a fire alarm, and pulls it off. Its lights turn red.)

[Old building]

DOCTOR: Home, sweet home.

[Caretaker's storeroom]

CLARA: Canoodling cancelled, if you need a hand. Doctor? You invisible? I am so going to confiscate that watch.

[Old building]

(The Doctor is invisible now.)
DOCTOR [OC]: Where are you, my sleeping beauty?
(The Blitzer activates. It cannot see its target.)
DOCTOR [OC]: Gotcha. Let's dance!

[Outside the Caretaker's storeroom]

CLARA: Doctor? Where are you?
(She walks away, Danny arrives and knocks on the storeroom door.)
DANNY: Hello?
(He spots another gizmo, this time blinking red, in the hanging basket, and takes it.)

[Alleyway]

(The Skovox Blitzer is following the invisible Doctor's infrared footprints.)
BLITZER: Nine stop query rescan. Target reacquired success success.

[School]

DOCTOR [OC]: Come on, come on, come on.
(The doors burst open.)
DOCTOR [OC]: Gangway! Not far now. Come on.
BLITZER: Nine stop parsing data pursue.
DOCTOR [OC]: Bingo.
BLITZER: Target reacquired.
(It trundles off as Danny enters.)
DANNY: Hello?

[School hall]

(The Doctor turns off the invisibility watch and sees that the gizmos on the circle of chairs are not flashing green.)
DOCTOR: What? Red? Red. No. No, no, no, no, no, no, no!
(The Blitzer enters.)
BLITZER: Range one point four nine scan complete problem problem.
DOCTOR: Listen. I'm unarmed. I'm peaceful. Don't you understand? I, I know that you shouldn't be on this planet but I can help you with that. I
BLITZER: Problem solution destroy.
DANNY: I want a word with you.
DOCTOR: Get back!
(The Blitzer turns on Danny.)
BLITZER: Problem solution destroy.
(The Blitzer starts shooting, Danny ducks and throws himself to the floor. dropping the chronodyne gizmo. It slides into the circle of chairs and turns green. Then he picks up a chair to attack the Blitzer.)
DANNY: No! Get away from me!
(The Doctor uses his screwdriver. The chair is sucked into a vortex that he creates. The Blitzer is also sucked towards it, as is Danny.)
BLITZER: Temporal disrupt. Warning warning. Temporal failure.
(Clara enters and runs to grab Danny.)
CLARA: No! No, no, no, no! Doctor, stop! Doctor!
BLITZER: Warning system failure. Abort. Abort.
(The Blitzer goes into the golden vortex, and the Doctor turns it off. Then he spots the gizmo that Danny dropped and picks it up.)
DOCTOR: (sarcastic) Oh, oh, well done, PE, brilliant work. What's this? A chronodyne generator? I'll just deactivate that, shall I? I've got a swimming certificate so that qualifies me to meddle with higher technology. Never mind that some people are actually trying to save the planet. Oh, no. There's only room in my head for cross-country and the offside rule.
CLARA: Danny, what are you doing here?
DANNY: I was checking up on him. He's been up to something, fiddling with the electric, but what the? No. What? Did you see that thing? Tell me you saw that thing.
CLARA: I saw the thing, yeah. Doctor, are we safe? Is the planet safe? It's gone?
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, yes, yes, for the moment. But the thing is, you see, the chronodyne generators have to be precisely aligned to generate the vortex. But the sergeant here, he went and moved one.
CLARA: But the chronodyne worked. It's gone.
(The Doctor measures with his screwdriver while Danny looks at a burning hole in the middle of a load of stacked chairs in the far corner.)
DOCTOR: But not far enough. The vortex will open here again, but not in a billion years.
CLARA: Then when?
DOCTOR: Er, seventy four hours. Three days? Three days to think of something new because now it knows what to expect. Now it has scanned me and it will kill me on sight, thanks to PE here.
DANNY: Clara, why are you talking to him like that? Why are you using words like chronodyne? Was that thing a space thing? Oh. Oh, my God, you're from space. You're a spacewoman. You said you were from Blackpool.
(The Doctor is writing in a notebook.) 
CLARA: It's a play! For the summer fete.
DOCTOR: It's a what?
CLARA: Yes, it's a play. Shut up, it is a play. We are rehearsing a play. Shh, shh, shh, shh. A surprise play. And, er, you see, the vortex thing is, is a lighting effect. Very clever. And that thing is, is one of the kids. In fancy dress. Really, really good fancy dress.
DANNY: How stupid do you think I am?
DOCTOR: I'm willing to put a number on it.
DANNY: I'm not a moron, Clara. And he's not the caretaker. He's your dad. Your space dad.
DOCTOR: Oh, genius. That is, that is really, really brilliant reasoning. How can you think that I'm her dad when we both look exactly the same age?
CLARA: We do not look the same age.
DOCTOR: I was being kind. Right, I'm going to hypnotise him. I'm going to erase his memory.  
CLARA: Doctor, stop!
DOCTOR: Tiny little brain, only take a moment.
CLARA: He's my boyfriend.
DOCTOR: Well, I'll try not to erase the whole thing. I'll leave the bits that.
CLARA: He's my boyfriend. I thought you'd figured this out.
DOCTOR: Him?
CLARA: Yes, him.
DOCTOR: No, he's not.
CLARA: Yes, he is.
DANNY: Yes, I am.
DOCTOR: But he's a PE teacher. You wouldn't go out with a PE teacher. It's a mistake. You've made a boyfriend error.
DANNY: I am not a PE teacher. I am a maths teacher.
DOCTOR: You're a soldier. Why would you go out with a soldier? Why not get a dog or a big plant?
CLARA: Because I love him!
DOCTOR: Why would you say that? Is this part of the surprise play?
CLARA: (sigh) There is no surprise play.
DOCTOR: Oh, it's a roller coaster with you tonight, isn't it? What about the handsome one, the one with the bow tie?
CLARA: Who? Adrian? No, no, no. He's just a friend and not my type.
DANNY: Clara, are you going to explain any of this? Who is this guy?
CLARA: The Doctor is
DOCTOR: Go on.
DANNY: Yes, explain. Who is he? Why have you never mentioned him?
CLARA: Because he's an alien.
DANNY: Er, are you an alien?
CLARA: No, no, no, I'm still from Blackpool. Me and the Doctor, we travel through time and space.
DOCTOR: Exhibit A.
(The Doctor pulls the curtains back on the stage.)
CLARA: It's called a Tardis, but it's disguised as an old police phone box.
(She gets on stage and the Doctor feeds her the next line.)
DOCTOR: (sotto) It's bigger on the inside.
CLARA: And it's bigger on the inside than the outside.
(The Doctor opens the Tardis doors.)
DOCTOR: Voila.
CLARA: And we travel the universe in it.
(Danny leans in and looks around, then at the outside, and the inside again.)
DANNY: And what about that thing? Did you bring that here?
DOCTOR: No. I'm going to protect you from that thing.
DANNY: You said it was coming back.
DOCTOR: Yes, it is coming back, thanks to you.
DANNY: This is a school. We have to evacuate, call the Army.
DOCTOR: And that is the most dangerous thing right there.
(The Doctor closes the Tardis doors.)
DOCTOR: Are you sure hypnotising's not on the menu?
CLARA: Yes.
DANNY: But we need to get help. This is an emergency.
DOCTOR: Look, take him away. Shut him up, shut him down. Up or down, it doesn't matter to me. I've got a lot of work to do. Again.
CLARA: Will you be okay?
DOCTOR: Why wouldn't I be okay? I was fine till you two blundered in.
DANNY: Am I just being ignored?
(Clara has to help the bewildered Danny down the stairs from the stage.)
CLARA: Come on, Danny. It's all right, it's. Come on, it's all fine. You'll be okay. Let's er, get those legs moving. That's it, down those stairs. Yep, that's it. This can all be explained and everything will be fine.
DOCTOR: And when this is all over, you can finish the job.
CLARA: How do you mean?
DOCTOR: Well, you've explained me to him. You haven't explained him to me.

[Danny's flat]

CLARA: What do you think? Say something.
DANNY: So, there's an alien, that used to look like Adrian. Then he turned into a Scottish caretaker and every now and then, when I'm not looking, you elope with him.
CLARA: I don't elope.
DANNY: Do you love him?
CLARA: No.
DANNY: Really had enough of the lies.
CLARA: Not in that way.
DANNY: What other way is there?
CLARA: You know what I mean.
DANNY: I don't know what you mean. I know what you tell me, which isn't always the truth.
CLARA: Danny
DANNY: Why do you do it? Why do you fly off in the box with him? The truth. Please, just this once.
CLARA: Because it's amazing. Because I see wonders.
DANNY: Okay.
CLARA: What are you thinking?
DANNY: That's a good question. It's funny, you only really know what someone thinks of you when you know what lies they've told you. I mean, you say you've seen wonders, you've seen amazing things, and you kept them secret from me. So what do you think of me, Clara?
CLARA: Please, tell me how I fix this.
DANNY: I just want to know who you are.
CLARA: You know who I am.
DANNY: When you're with him. When you're with the Doctor.

[Outside the Caretaker's storeroom]

(Clara comes out with the invisibility watch.)
CLARA: (sotto) Okay, I think we've just got time before parents' evening.
DANNY: An invisibility watch? Not even a ring.
(Danny puts it on.)
CLARA: Press the button on the side, you're invisible. You'll see me with the Doctor, the other me. The exactly the same other me. Okay?

[Tardis]

(The Doctor is building a contraption.)
DOCTOR: Afternoon. Thanks for keeping out of my way. You haven't brought Dave with you, I hope.
CLARA: His name's Danny. And no, I haven't. I've er, I explained it all to him. He gets it. He took it really well.
DOCTOR: Pass me that synestic.
CLARA: So, when the Blitzer comes back, are you going to catch him with that?
DOCTOR: It'll be a long, fiddly job. It's going to take me at least twenty four hours. Even longer if people keep talking to me, so do keep going.
CLARA: If it comes back Thursday night, are you sure about that? Cos you said the chronodyne is unstable.
DOCTOR: If you want bother someone, go and bother PE.
CLARA: He's a maths teacher.
DOCTOR: That's a shame, I like maths.
CLARA: Not a soldier.
DOCTOR: Interesting.
CLARA: What is?
DOCTOR: I'm bored. Let's go somewhere fun. What do you say? Do you want to see the Thames frozen over? Oh, those frost fairs.
(The Doctor goes around the console, setting controls. Clara follows, returning them to neutral.)
CLARA: But you can't. The Skovox thing.
DOCTOR: It's a time machine. We can get back straightaway, like we always do on your dates. Just make sure you don't get yourself a tan or anything, or lose a limb.
CLARA: I don't think we should, not this time.
DOCTOR: You've never said no before. Not even in the middle of dinner. Remember when you had to eat two meals in a row?
CLARA: I just think, with the school in danger
(Danny turns off the watch.)
CLARA: Danny, why are you?
DANNY: He already knows I'm here. That's why he's talking like that. He's being clever.
DOCTOR: Now you mention it, being a Time Lord, I can feel a light shield aura when it's right next to me.
DANNY: Oh ho, ho. Time Lord? Might have known.
DOCTOR: Might have known what?
DANNY: Well, the accent's good, but you can always spot the aristocracy. It's in the, the attitude.
CLARA: Danny.
DANNY: Now, Time Lords, do you salute those?
DOCTOR: Definitely not.
DANNY: Ah. Sir!
(Danny salutes.)
DOCTOR: And you do not call me sir.
DANNY: As you wish, sir. Absolutely, sir.
DOCTOR: And you can get out of my Tardis!
DANNY: Immediately, sir.
CLARA: Doctor, this is stupid, this is unfair.
DANNY: One thing, Clara. I'm a soldier, guilty as charged. You see him? He's an officer.
DOCTOR: I am not an officer!
DANNY: I'm the one who carries you out of the fire. He's the one who lights it.
DOCTOR: Out. Now.
DANNY: Right away, sir. Straight now?
DOCTOR: Yes.
DANNY: Am I dismissed?
DOCTOR: Yes, you are!
DANNY: That's him. Look at him, right now. That's who he is.
(Danny leaves.)
DOCTOR: On balance, I think that went quite well.

[Caretaker's storeroom]

CLARA: Danny, it's not time to go home yet. It's parents' evening.
(Clara leaves.)
DOCTOR: Humans. I never learn.
COURTNEY: What's in the box? It's not really a policeman, is it?
DOCTOR: You want to know what's in that box? I'll tell you what's in that box. It's a time machine. It also travels in space. And it usually contains a man who just wants to get on with his work of preventing the end of the world, but keeps being interrupted by boring little humans.
COURTNEY: Cool. So, that's really a spaceship?
(The Doctor pulls Courtney back from the Tardis by her collar.)
DOCTOR: I'm serious. I'm trying to save this planet.
COURTNEY: End of the world for me tonight, whatever you do. Parents' evening.
DOCTOR: Is your name really Disruptive Influence?
COURTNEY: Courtney Woods. Can I go in space?
DOCTOR: I'll let you know. I may have a vacancy. But not right now.
(He hustles Courtney out.)
DOCTOR: Two days. I can do it.

[Gymnasium]

(The teachers are laying out their tables.)
ARMITAGE: Right, are we quorate? Time to admit the hordes. And look who's at the front of the queue.
ADRIAN: Who are they?
CLARA: Courtney Woods' mum and dad.
ADRIAN: Can someone else do them first?
DANNY: No problem, Ade. I can cope with anything tonight.
ARMITAGE: Oh, happy days.
(He opens the doors and lets the parents in. Meanwhile, in the School Theatre, a golden vortex appears and a chair is thrown out.)

[Tardis]

(The Doctor carrying his tool box when the scanner beeps.)
DOCTOR: No, no, no. No! No, no, no, no, no!
(He grabs his ghostbusters backpack and runs out.)

[Gymnasium]

DANNY: I would say yes, I'm afraid Courtney is a disruptive influence.
MR WOODS: Yeah, but last year you said she was a very disruptive influence.
MRS WOODS: So, I suppose that counts as an improvement.
(Danny spots the Doctor at the doors, and does a loud Ahem! Clara looks up and sees the Doctor gesturing to them.)
DANNY: Excuse me, I think the caretaker wants me.
CLARA: Sorry, Mrs Christodolou, I think er, I think the caretaker wants me too.
MRS CHRISTOPHOLOU: But what about my Angelina?
CLARA: Yeah, she's great, yeah, a really great girl,  A plus, ten out of ten, top of the class. Sorry. Although, actually, handwriting could be better.
(Danny and Clara run out.)
ARMITAGE: I'm sure they'll be back in a moment.
MRS WOODS: Looks like our Courtney was right about those two.

[Playground]

CLARA: What's happening?
DOCTOR: Clara, the vortex is opening.
DANNY: You said Thursday night. Right, hall, quick.
DOCTOR: PE, shut up. Clara, it'll scan the area. If it gets to parents' evening, it'll kill them all.
DANNY: We've got to evacuate.
DOCTOR: Shut up!
CLARA: Quickly. What do I do?
DOCTOR: It'll be here any second. Get to the hall.
(He gives her the sonic screwdriver.)
DOCTOR: Give it some squirts of helicon energy, setting number forty one. No more than three seconds each, random pulses. Distract it, then you lead it away from the hall, give me two minutes.
CLARA: Then what?
DOCTOR: Just run straight to the Tardis.
DANNY: But your gadget isn't ready yet. Twenty four hours, you said.
DOCTOR: Yes, well, I've revised that down to two minutes. Probably. Clara, go.
CLARA: On my way.
DANNY: You're using her like a decoy?
DOCTOR: No, not like a decoy. As a decoy. Don't they teach you anything at stupid school?
DANNY: Well, is there anything I can do?
DOCTOR: Yes. Yes, and this is very, very important. Leave us alone!

[School hall]

(Clara looks into see the Blitzer in the vortex.)
BLITZER: Disrupt temporal lock. Disengaged scan.
CLARA: Here we go.
(She waves the sonic screwdriver.)
BLITZER: Incoming stop identified Helicon Helicon commence retargeting.
(It chases Clara.)

[Corridor]

(Danny sees Clara run past the top of the corridor.)
BLITZER [OC]: Target acquired. Destroy.
(Then it trundles past.)

[Playground]

(Clara squirts more Helicon.)
BLITZER: Target within range.
(She runs into the Caretaker's storeroom)
BLITZER: Problem solution destroy.
(It destroys the door.)

[Caretaker's storeroom]

BLITZER: Destroy. Destroy.
CLARA: Doctor, now! It's got to be now!
DOCTOR: Twenty seconds.
BLITZER: Destroy. Destroy.
CLARA: Doctor!
(Clara dodges the weapons fire and helps the Doctor on with the backpack.)
DOCTOR: Am I green? Am I green?
CLARA: You're green!
(The Doctor uses a commentator's microphone to talk to the Blitzer via the backpack. You know, the ones with the bar that the speaker rests against their upper lip to keep it at the correct distance whilst close enough not to pick up surrounding sound.)
DOCTOR: Stop! Skovox Blitzer!
BLITZER: Awaiting orders.
DOCTOR: Superior Skovox Artificer. Analyse stop analyse stop.
BLITZER: Superior recognised. Pattern one one oh, Orders orders.
CLARA: Why's it listening to you?
DOCTOR: Listening to its superior. This is a rough copy. It thinks I'm its general. Initiate input. Commence shutdown protocol. No conflict. Conclusion?
BLITZER: Problem solution.
DOCTOR: Conclusion.  
BLITZER: Final input code missing. Emergency terminate. Initiate self-destruct in nine eight
(The Blitzer's eyes turn from blue to red.)
DOCTOR: The input code. I forgot the final input code.
(He stabs frantically at a keypad.)
BLITZER: Seven six five
CLARA: Do it now!
DOCTOR: I need time. Distract it, Clara!
CLARA: Me? What can I do?
BLITZER: Three two one.
DANNY [OC]: Oi, Skovox. Over here.
(Danny turns off the invisibility watch, then runs and somersaults over the Blitzer.)
BLITZER: Under attack.
DOCTOR: Artificer Artificer. Stop. Confirm stop override final input code.
BLITZER: Code accepted. Abort self-destruct. Orders accepted  Stop stop stop.
(The Blitzer powers off. Clara hugs Danny.)
CLARA: Oh, my God! Oh, my God, you were amazing! Oh, my God, you were so brilliant.
DANNY: Well, yeah, I was okay, wasn't I? I was behind you every step of the way. Had to make sure you were safe. (to the Doctor) You okay?
DOCTOR: Okay.
CLARA: Just okay?
DANNY: It's all right, it doesn't matter. I don't need him to like me. It doesn't matter if he likes me or hates me, I just need to do exactly one thing for you. Doctor, am I right?
DOCTOR: Yes.
CLARA: What? What one thing?
DANNY: I need to be good enough for you. That's why he's angry. Just in case I'm not.
CLARA: He, er, he did just save the whole world.
DOCTOR: Yeah, yeah. Good start.

[Space]

(The Blitzer is cast adrift from the Tardis, micro-meteorites bouncing off its metal surface.)
DOCTOR [OC]: Farewell, Skovox Blitzer. Have a nice war. So, Courtney Woods, impressed yet?

[Tardis]

(The doors are open, and Courtney is holding on to the doorframe for dear life.)
COURTNEY: Actually, I'm feeling a bit ill.
DOCTOR: Ah, it can be a bit overwhelming. But look. The Olveron Cluster. A million stars, a hundred million inhabited planets.
(Courtney gags and runs inside. Sounds of an unfortunate occurrence.)
DOCTOR: Ah, yes. There has been a spillage.

[Danny's flat]

(Snuggling on the sofa in front of the television.)
CLARA: So, what do you think of him now? 
DANNY: Of the Doctor?
CLARA: Yeah. See, he's all right, isn't he, really, underneath it all.
(She turns the television off with the remote.)
CLARA: Okay. Tell me what you're thinking.
DANNY: I know men like him. I've served under them. They push you and make you stronger, till you're doing things you never thought you could. I saw you tonight. You did exactly what he told you. You weren't even scared. And you should have been.
CLARA: I trust him. He's never let me down.
DANNY: Fine. If he ever pushes you too far, I want you to tell me, because I know what that's like. You'll tell me if that happens, yeah?
CLARA: Yeah, it's a deal.
DANNY: No. It's a promise.
CLARA: Okay. I promise.
DANNY: And if you break that promise, Clara, we're finished.
CLARA: Don't say that.
DANNY: I'm saying it because if you don't tell me the truth, I can't help you. And I could never stand not being able to help you. We clear?
CLARA: Yes. We're clear.
(They snuggle down again and she turns the television back on.)

[White corridor]

(The late CSO is sitting across a desk from a man in a pale grey suit.)
MATTHEW: It was mad. It was like in a film or on the telly like, with science fiction guns.
SEB: Skovox Blitzer, sounds like. We've had a few in from that. Wouldn't feel too bad.
MATTHEW: If I hadn't. If I hadn't. Hang on. That doesn't make sense.
SEB: Makes perfect sense to me. 
MATTHEW: How did I escape? I, I don't remember how I got away.
SEB: Well, I was coming to that. I'm afraid you really rather didn't.
(Matthew stands up and looks around.)
MATTHEW: Then how did I get here?
SEB: Well. Big question.
MATTHEW: Where am I?
SEB: What name would you like? There's a range. The afterlife. The Promised Land. I'm partial to the Nethersphere.
(Matthew goes to the circular window behind Seb and looks through the blinds.)
MATTHEW: My God.
(Missy, the Edwardian lady, walks into the corridor, looks at them then walks away.)
SEB: Sorry, she's a bit er, busy today. So, any questions?

[The Moon 2049]

(Clara is using a communications console. She and Courtney Woods, Miss Disruptive Influence, are wearing orange spacesuits from the Tardis.)
CLARA: Hello, hello. Hello, Earth. We have a terrible decision to make. It's an uncertain decision, and we don't have a lot of time. The man who normally helps, he's gone. Maybe he's not coming back. In fact, I, I really don't think he is. We're on our own. So, an innocent life versus the future of all mankind. We have forty five minutes to decide.
(Because that is how long is left on the countdown to detonation of the 100 nuclear devices within range of the trigger.)

[Coal Hill School]

(Previously, in the now time.)
CLARA: Courtney Woods. Doctor, she has gone crazy. She's uncontrollable. She took your psychic paper. She's been using it as fake ID.
DOCTOR: To get into museums?
CLARA: No, no, no. To buy White Lightning or alcopops or whatever.
DOCTOR: I've no idea what you're talking about. What, what is Courtney Woods?
CLARA: She's one of my year tens. She was in the Tardis.
DOCTOR: Doing what?
CLARA: Throwing up.
DOCTOR: Oh, her. Oh, that was ages ago.
CLARA: Look, she says that you told her that she wasn't special.
DOCTOR: Rubbish.
CLARA: She says that's what sent her off the rails.
DOCTOR: Pffff.

[Store cupboard]

(The Tardis has found a larger place than the previous supply cupboard, with glass panels in the door.)
CLARA: Doctor. I know, I know. But, you say something like that to somebody, it hurts. Especially if you're somebody of her age, especially if you're you. Doctor, it can affect her whole life.
DOCTOR: Bah.

[Tardis]

(Courtney is inside, at the console. The Doctor runs over to her.)
DOCTOR: Oi! Give over!
COURTNEY: I got stuff to clean up with.
(She holds up paper towels)
DOCTOR: What?
COURTNEY: And I got these from the chemist.
DOCTOR: Vortex manipulators?
(Magnetic bracelets on her wrists.)
COURTNEY: Travel sickness.
DOCTOR: Good. Because I don't like people being sick in my Tardis. No being sick. And no hanky-panky.
CLARA: Doctor!
DOCTOR: Sorry, that's the rules.
CLARA: Look, Courtney, you're not going to be needing those because you're not going to be doing any travelling. Doctor, will you just, just tell her?
DOCTOR: Tell her what?
CLARA: (through clenched teeth) Tell her that she's special.
DOCTOR: Have you gone bananas?
COURTNEY: Do you really think I'm not special? You can't just take me away like that. It's like you kicked a big hole in in the side of my life. You really think it? I'm nothing? I'm not special?
DOCTOR: (sotto) Pfft. God. (normal) How'd you like to be the first woman on the moon? Is that special enough for you?
COURTNEY: Yeah, all right.
DOCTOR: Okay. Now we can do something interesting.
(He sets the Tardis flying.)
CLARA: Hey, Doctor!

[Cargo bay]

(They step out of the Tardis in full spacesuits into a storage area filled with cylindrical objects, some in racks. Some have a US flag on them, some have Cyrillic writing.)
COURTNEY: This isn't the moon. Where are we?
DOCTOR: On a recycled space shuttle. 2049, judging by that prototype version of the Bennett oscillator.
(They take their helmets off.)
DOCTOR: Where's the gravity coming from?
CLARA: What are they?
DOCTOR: About a hundred nuclear bombs.
(An alarm sounds. The Doctor looks out through the airlock window.)
DOCTOR: Ah. We're on our way to the moon. Check that. We're about to crash into it! Hold on! Hold on!
(They grab hold of cargo nets.)
CLARA: Why didn't you just tell her you didn't mean it?
(The space shuttle belly-flops onto the moon's surface and skids to a halt. The three person shuttle crew enter, lead by a woman.)
LUNDVIK: Who the hell do you think you are?
DOCTOR: Why have you got all these nuclear bombs?
LUNDVIK: I'm not going to give you another chance.
DOCTOR: Oh? Well, you're just going to have to shoot us, then. Shoot the little girl first.
COURTNEY: What?
DOCTOR: Yes. She doesn't want to stand there watching us getting shot, does she? She'll be terrified. Girl first, then her teacher, and then me. You'll have to spend a lot of time shooting me because I will keep on regenerating.
(Courtney sits on the deck behind the big Russian bomb and sulks.)
DOCTOR: In fact, I'm not entirely sure that I won't keep on regenerating for ever.
CLARA: Doctor, what are you doing?
(The Doctor is making slow steps backwards and forwards. He ends up doing bunny hops.)
DOCTOR: Gravity test. So, it'll be very time-consuming and messy, and rather wasteful, because I think I might just possibly be able to help you. You see, I am a super-intelligent alien being who flies in time and space. Are you going to shoot me?
LUNDVIK: No.
DOCTOR: Good. Why have you got all these nuclear bombs? No, no, no. Easier question. What's wrong with my yo-yo?
(Just like the Fourth Doctor did once, he uses a yo-yo to test the gravity.)
CLARA: Doctor, it goes up and down.
DOCTOR: Bingo.
(The penny finally drops.)
CLARA: Ah.
DOCTOR: Ah ha. We should be bouncing about this cabin like little fluffy clouds. But we're not. What is the matter with the moon?
LUNDVIK: Nobody knows.
CLARA: Do you know what's wrong with the moon?
DOCTOR: It's put on weight.
LUNDVIK: How can the moon put on weight?
DOCTOR: Oh, lots of ways. Gravity bombs, axis alignment systems, planet shellers.
LUNDVIK: So it's alien.
DOCTOR: Must be causing chaos on Earth. The tides will be so high that they will drown whole cities.
LUNDVIK: Yeah.
DOCTOR: So what are you doing about it?
(Lundvik takes a case from the wall.)
DOCTOR: This?
LUNDVIK: That's what you do with aliens, isn't it? Blow them up?

[Moon]

(Helmets on, they open the airlock onto the moon's surface. Courtney goes first. Okay, it is actually Lanzarote. At least they got to go on location - to the same place as in Planet of Fire.)
COURTNEY: Wow. Wow! One small thing for a thing. One enormous thing for a thingy thing.
LUNDVIK: So much for history.
(They leave the scorched and pretty much wrecked unnamed space shuttle and walk over to a modular settlement in a nearby crater. Courtney takes her mobile phone from a pocket and takes lots of photos, as a half-Earth hangs in the sky.)
LUNDVIK: There was a mining survey, Mexicans. Something happened up here. Nobody knows what. That's when the trouble began back on Earth. High tide everywhere at once. The greatest natural disaster in history.
(They walk around the building. The airlock is wide open.)
CLARA: Cobwebs?
LUNDVIK: Henry, go back and prime the bombs.
HENRY: Er, is there any instructions?
LUNDVIK: There's a switch on each of them. The light goes red.
HENRY: They won't go off?
LUNDVIK: No, not till I fiddle with this thing.
(The red case she has kept with her since she took it off the wall. Middle-aged Henry turns back, looking worried.)
HENRY: Okay.
LUNDVIK: Shall we?
DOCTOR: Is that the best you could get?
LUNDVIK: Second-hand space shuttle, third-hand astronauts.

[Module]

(A remarkable lot of cobwebs for a building open to vacuum. They close the door to the corridor behind them.)
DOCTOR: How many people here?
LUNDVIK: Four. Minera Luna San Pedro. It was privately financed. They where doing a mineral survey up here.
DOCTOR: Messages? Mayday? SOS?
DUKE: Pretty much all the satellites had been whacked out of orbit. They managed to send back some screams.
DOCTOR: So then you came up here to rescue them with your bombs?
DUKE: Not quite.
LUNDVIK: They disappeared ten years ago.
DOCTOR: Nobody came?
LUNDVIK: There was no shuttle.
DOCTOR: You had one.
LUNDVIK: It was in a museum. They'd cut the back off it so kids could ride in it. We'd stopped going into space. Nobody cared. Not until
(Courtney screams.)
CLARA: Courtney!
(Courtney has found a spacesuit hanging in a cocoon.)
CLARA: Oh, my God. Doctor, tell me there wasn't anyone inside that thing.
(He scans it with his screwdriver.)
DOCTOR: I could, but it wouldn't make it true.
DUKE: I'll get some power back on.
CLARA: Come on. Now, Courtney, come here. Don't look. You all right?
COURTNEY: I'm okay.
(The Doctor cuts the corpse down.)
CLARA: Hey. Look. Look at me. Look. It's all right if you're not.
COURTNEY: I'm fine. What did it?
DOCTOR: Maybe something trying to find out how you're put together. Or maybe how you tasted.
COURTNEY: Do we have guns?
LUNDVIK: Not unless you brought some.
DOCTOR: Chicken, apparently.
(The settlement powers up.)
DOCTOR: Save the air.
(They take their helmets off. A few notes of that Psycho shower scene theme sound in the background. The Doctor powers up a computer console and looks at the survey records.)
DOCTOR: They didn't find anything.
LUNDVIK: Eh?
DOCTOR: The Mexicans. They didn't find any minerals on the moon at all. Nada.
(He looks at photographs of the moon strewn on a table.)
DOCTOR: Oh.
CLARA: Oh?
DOCTOR: Lines of tectonic stress.
LUNDVIK: That's the Mare Fecunditatis. It's been there since the Apollo days. It's always been there.
DOCTOR: No, no, no. These are much, much bigger. Sea of Tranquillity. Sea of Nectar. Sea of Ingenuity. Sea of Crises.
CLARA: Meaning?
(The lights flicker.)
DOCTOR: Meaning, Clara, that the moon, this little planetoid that's been tagging along beside you for a hundred million years, which gives you light at night and seas to sail on, is in the process of falling to bits.
(Bang! Everything shakes.)

[Moon]

(Henry, who is still on his way back to the shuttle, is knocked to his knees. He gets back up on his feet and tries to use his communicator.)
HENRY: Hello, Captain? Captain? Captain?
(Something is going on inside a nearby slit in the ground. We see him shine his torch in, then stagger backwards and fall as if something is heading for him.)
HENRY: Argh!

[Module]

(There is a high-pitched sound and a scuttling noise.)
COURTNEY: What the hell was that?
LUNDVIK: Duke, is that you?
DUKE [OC]: I don't sound anything like that.
LUNDVIK: Can you try and get the lights back on?
DUKE [OC]: That's what I'm doing.
DOCTOR: Torch. Give me your torch. Whatever it is, it's in here.
(Sounds of running claws.)
DOCTOR: I think we've found your alien.
(A giant space spider with luminous red knees heads for them down an adjoining corridor.)
DOCTOR: Back, back, back! We need a door. A door, a door!
CLARA: Here! Here! The door's locked.
DOCTOR: Come on, come on! There's no power to work it. Come on!
CLARA: Doctor.
(He drags them down behind the table.)
DOCTOR: Stay still. It's sensing movement. It can't see you. Fast movement. There must be another exit through there. Slowly. Slowly. Head to that exit. Slowly. Slowly. Slowly, slowly. (They inch their way.)
DOCTOR: Gently, gently. When I say run, run.
LUNDVIK: Who made you the boss?
DOCTOR: Well, you say run, then.
LUNDVIK: Duke!
(The giant spider leaps on Duke as he comes in from another corridor.)
DUKE: Argh!
LUNDVIK: Duke!
(The locked door opens.)
DOCTOR: Run! We have power. Run!
CLARA: Quick, it's shutting.
(The door slams shut, and Courtney is on the wrong side, because her feet are no longer in contact with the floor.)
COURTNEY: Miss!
CLARA: Courtney! Courtney!
COURTNEY: Miss!
CLARA: Courtney! The power's gone again.
(Courtney is floating in mid-air.)
COURTNEY: It's killed him. It's coming in here! Doctor, it's coming in here!
DOCTOR: You'll be okay!
(Lundvik uses her communicator.)
LUNDVIK: Henry? Henry?
DOCTOR: Courtney, look at me. Look at me! Courtney!
(The spider is walking across the ceiling.)
DOCTOR: Try and get to the door! Try and get yourself down here.
(The Doctor gets the glass pane out of the door.)
DOCTOR: Courtney, grab my yo-yo!
(She does, just as gravity returns and she drops to the floor. The spider rears over her and she screams, then reaches for something in her backpack.)
DOCTOR: Courtney!
(Courtney stands and pumps something out of a bottle at the spider. The others re-enter.)
CLARA: Courtney.
COURTNEY: Kills ninety nine percent of all known germs.
(The clean-up stuff she brought with her.)
DOCTOR: Good stuff, Courtney. Just don't try that at home, okay?
CLARA: You all right?
COURTNEY: Why did I just fly? This is nuts.
(The Doctor scans the remains of the spider with his screwdriver.)
DOCTOR: Did you say germs? Oh, God, this is incredible. Look at the size of it. It's the size of a badger.
CLARA: Doctor
DOCTOR: It's a prokaryotic unicellular life form, with non-chromosomal DNA. Which, as you and me know. Well, not you and me. Well, you, certainly not. You and me, yes, scientists know, this is a germ. You flew because that one point three billion tonnes shifted. It moved. It's an unstable mass.
COURTNEY: I'm scared, Miss.
CLARA: Okay.
(Lundvik has looked at what is left of Duke.)
LUNDVIK: He'd just had a grand-daughter. Elina. She was his first. He was my teacher. He taught me how to fly. We were both given the sack on the same day.
DOCTOR: Which way to the Mare Fecunditatis?
COURTNEY: Please can I go home now? I'm really. I'm really sorry, but I'd like to go home.

[Moon]

(The Doctor leads them in single file.)
LUNDVIK: Henry, come in. If you don't mind, Henry, come in.
CLARA: Doctor, this is dangerous now.
DOCTOR: It was dangerous before. Everything's dangerous if you want it to be. Eating chips is dangerous. Crossing the road. It's no way to live your life. Tell her. You're supposed to be teaching her.
CLARA: Look, I have a duty of care, okay? You know what that is?
DOCTOR: Course I know what a duty of care is. What are you suggesting? She's fine. What are you, thirty five?
COURTNEY: Fifteen.
(Clara shakes her head.)

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: Now, don't touch anything.
COURTNEY: You got any games?
DOCTOR: Oh, don't be so stupid!
COURTNEY: Can I get reception up here?

[Cargo bay]

(Lundvik is setting the triggers on the nuclear devices.)
DOCTOR: Get in.
CLARA: Why are you shutting her in? We don't need to stay, do we?
DOCTOR: Eh?
CLARA: It's obvious, isn't it? The moon doesn't break up.
DOCTOR: How do you know?
CLARA: Because I've been in the future, and the moon is still there. I think. You know the moon is still there, right?
DOCTOR: Maybe it isn't the moon. Maybe it's a hologram or a big painting, or a special effect. Maybe it's a completely different moon.
CLARA: But you would know.
DOCTOR: I would?
CLARA: If the moon fell to bits in 2049, somebody would've mentioned it. It would have come up in conversation. So it doesn't break up. So the world doesn't end. So, let's just get in the Tardis and go.
DOCTOR: Clara, there are some moments in time that I simply can't see. Little eye-blinks. They don't look the same as other things. They're not clear. They're fuzzy, they're grey. Little moments in which big things are decided. And this is one of them. Just now, I can't tell what happens to the moon, because whatever happens to the moon hasn't been decided yet. And it's going to be decided here and now. Which very much sounds as though it's up to us.
LUNDVIK: Neither of you are going anywhere. I've lost my crew. We were the last astronauts. This is the last shuttle, these are the last nuclear bombs. We're the last chance for Earth, and you're staying to help me.
DOCTOR: Decision made.
CLARA: Yeah.
(In the Tardis, Courtney walks around with the phone, bored. She touches some controls, which burble and release a bit of steam, then she sits down.)

[Moon]

(Looking down on the Mexicans' survey and sample equipment.)
DOCTOR: What is killing the moon?
CLARA: How can the moon die, though?
DOCTOR: Everything does, sooner or later.
LUNDVIK: Can we save it?
DOCTOR: Depends what's killing it.
LUNDVIK: There are the other three.
(They go down to the spacesuits in cobwebs near cracks in the crust.)
CLARA: Is it those germ things, then? Are they like cockroaches? Is it, is it an infestation?
LUNDVIK: Is it?
DOCTOR: Well, I've only seen one of them. It would take an awful lot more to cause the moon to put on one point three billion tonnes.
(A giant spider-germ comes out of its lair next to a spacesuit and jumps the Doctor.)
DOCTOR: Argh!
CLARA: Doctor!
(Clara tries the disinfectant spray.)
LUNDVIK: It's a vacuum. It won't work.
(They grab at its legs and get it off the Doctor's faceplate. It scuttles back into its lair.)
DOCTOR: Well, that makes two.
CLARA: Sunlight.
LUNDVIK: Sunlight?
CLARA: If they're germs. My nan says it's the best disinfectant there is.
DOCTOR: Shine your light down there.
(Lundvik does. There are lots of the red-kneed germs.)
LUNDVIK: Where have they come from?
DOCTOR: Maybe they've been there all the time. It's warmish. They're multiplying, feeding, evolving.
(They leave, rapidly.)
LUNDVIK: Doctor, if the moon breaks up, it'll kill us all in about forty five minutes.
DOCTOR: I agree. Unless something else is going on.
(He uses his yo-yo to get a sample from another fissure. It comes back wet)
LUNDVIK: There's no water on the moon.
DOCTOR: It's not water. It's amniotic fluid. The stuff that life comes from. I've got to go down there.
LUNDVIK: Doctor.
DOCTOR: Back to your shuttle. Get your bombs ready. You, get to the Tardis. Get safe. Get Courtney safe. I will be back.
(He takes germ killer spray from Clara.)
CLARA: What? No. Doctor. Doctor!
(The Doctor jumps down into the fissure.)
CLARA: Doctor!
LUNDVIK: Will he?
(Clara raises her arms in surrender, then lowers them and sighs.)
LUNDVIK: Will he be back?
CLARA: If he says so, I suppose he will.

[Tardis]

COURTNEY: Miss? Come in.
CLARA [OC]: Courtney?
COURTNEY: I'm bored. When are you coming back?
CLARA [OC]: We're on our way. What you doing?
COURTNEY: Putting some pictures on Tumblr.
(She flicks through pictures of the Doctor and Clara in space suits on her phone.)

[Moon]

CLARA: No! Courtney, don't put any photos on Tumblr.
LUNDVIK: My granny used to put things on Tumblr.
(A small moonquake makes them stagger.)
LUNDVIK: There he is.
(They have reached Henry. His helmet is open to the vacuum and he is a skeleton now. Clara looks across at the shuttle, on the opposite side of a ravine.)
CLARA: Was that where we landed? It looks so different.
(Cracks form in the moon's crust.)
LUNDVIK: It's going down.
(The shuttle tumbles into the widening ravine.)
CLARA: Courtney! Doctor!
LUNDVIK: We going to have to take cover. We're running out of oxygen.
CLARA: Doctor!
(He appears behind them.)
DOCTOR: Today's the day, humankind.

[Module]

CLARA: Where's the Tardis?
DOCTOR: She's in the shuttle, isn't she? She'll turn up.
CLARA: Last time you said that, she turned up on the wrong side of the planet.
DOCTOR: You two have never gotten on, have you?
CLARA: Look, we need to know where Courtney is.
DOCTOR: Courtney is safe. Och. Well, do you have her phone number?
CLARA: No, no, no. Of course I don't have her phone number.
DOCTOR: Well, what about the school? Does the secretary have her number?
CLARA: I can't. The secretary hates me. She thinks I gave her a packet of TENA Lady for Secret Santa. Look. Courtney's posting stuff on Tumblr. Doesn't that know where you are?
LUNDVIK: I don't know. I'm not a historian.
DOCTOR: Phone. I know what the problem is. Oh, she can't post that. She can't put pictures of me online.
(He sonicks Clara's phone then aims at a monitor up on the wall. Shades of the Three Doctors.)
COURTNEY [on monitor]: Yeah?
DOCTOR: You can't put pictures of me online.
CLARA: Are you okay?
COURTNEY [on monitor]: Er, I'm fine. What's up?
LUNDVIK: You said you know what the problem is.
DOCTOR: Yes, yes. It's a rather big problem.
CLARA: Okay,.do you want to share it with the class?
DOCTOR: Well, I had a little hypothesis. The seismic activity, the surface breaking up, the variable mass, the increase in gravity, the fluid. I scanned what's down there.
(He moves a mobile console and sonicks it, then creates a 3D projection of the moon.)
DOCTOR: The moon isn't breaking apart. Well, actually, it is breaking apart, and rather quickly. We've got about an hour and a half. But that isn't the problem. It's not infested.
COURTNEY [on monitor]: What are they, then, those things?
DOCTOR: Bacteria. Tiny, tiny bacteria living on something very, very big. Something that weighs about one point three billion tonnes. Something that's living. Something growing.
CLARA: Growing?
DOCTOR: That.
(He sonicks the image to show what looks very like a baby dragon curled up inside the moon.)
COURTNEY [on monitor]: That lives under the moon?
DOCTOR: No.
CLARA: What?
DOCTOR: That doesn't live under the moon. That is the moon.
LUNDVIK: What the hell are you talking about?
DOCTOR: The moon isn't breaking apart. The moon is hatching.
CLARA: Huh?
DOCTOR: The moon's an egg.
CLARA: Has it, er, has it always been an egg?
DOCTOR: Yes, for a hundred million years or so. Just, just growing. Just getting ready to be born.
CLARA: Okay. So the moon has never been the moon?
DOCTOR: No, no, no, no. It's never been dead. It's just taking a long time to come alive.
COURTNEY [on monitor]: Is it a chicken?
DOCTOR: No!
COURTNEY [on monitor]: Cos, for a chicken to have laid an egg that big 
DOCTOR: Courtney, don't spoil the moment.
CLARA: Doctor, what is it?
DOCTOR: I think that it's unique. I think that's the only one of its kind in the universe. I think that that is utterly beautiful.
LUNDVIK: How do we kill it?
CLARA: Why'd you want to kill it?
COURTNEY [on monitor]: It's a little baby.
LUNDVIK: Doctor, how do we kill it?
DOCTOR: Kill the moon?
(Lundvik nods. He turns off the hologram.)
DOCTOR: Kill the moon. Well, you have about a hundred of the best man-made nuclear weapons, if they still work. If that's what you want to do.
CLARA: Doctor, wait
LUNDVIK: Will that do it?
DOCTOR: A hundred nuclear bombs set off right where we are, right on top of a living, vulnerable creature? It'll never feel the sun on its back.
LUNDVIK: And then what? Will the moon still break up? You said, you said we had an hour and a half?
DOCTOR: Well, there'll be nothing to make it break up. There will be nothing trying to force its way out. The gravity of the little dead baby will pull all the pieces back together again. Of course, it won't be very pretty. You'd have an enormous corpse floating in the sky. You might have some very difficult conversations to have with your kids.
LUNDVIK: I don't have any kids.
CLARA: Stop. Right, listen. This is a, this is a life. I mean, this must be the biggest life in the universe.
COURTNEY [on monitor]: It's not even been born.
LUNDVIK: It is killing people. It is destroying the Earth.
CLARA: You cannot blame a baby for kicking.
LUNDVIK: Let me tell you something. You want to know what I took back from being in space? Look at the edge of the Earth. The atmosphere, that is paper thin. That is the only thing that saves us all from death. Everything else, the stars, the blackness. That's all dead. Sadly, that is the only life any of us will ever know.
COURTNEY [on monitor]: There's life here. There's life just next door.
LUNDVIK: Look, when you've grown up a bit, you'll realise that everything doesn't have to be nice. Some things are just bad. Anyway, you ran away. It's none of your business.
COURTNEY [on monitor]: Doctor, I want to come back.
CLARA: Courtney, you'll be safer where you are.
(Lundvik enters the code to start the countdown on the bombs.)

[Tardis]

COURTNEY: Doctor, I'm sorry. I want to come back, okay? I want to help.
DOCTOR [OC]: Ah, there's some DVDs on the blue book shelf.

[Module]

DOCTOR: Just stick one into the Tardis console. That'll bring you to me.
COURTNEY [on monitor]: Right.
DOCTOR: And make sure you hang on to the console, otherwise the Tardis will leave you behind.
CLARA: So what do we do? Doctor? Huh? Doctor, what do we do?
DOCTOR: Nothing.
CLARA: What?
DOCTOR: We don't do anything. I'm sorry, Clara. I can't help you.
CLARA: Of course you can help.
DOCTOR: The Earth isn't my home. The moon's not my moon. Sorry.
CLARA: Come on. Hey.
DOCTOR: Listen, there are moments in every civilisation's history in which the whole path of that civilisation is decided. The whole future path. Whatever future humanity might have depends upon the choice that is made right here and right now. Now, you've got the tools to kill it. You made them. You brought them up here all on your own, with your own ingenuity. You don't need a Time Lord. Kill it. Or let it live. I can't make this decision for you.
CLARA: Yeah, well, I can't make it.
DOCTOR: Well, there's two of you here.
CLARA: Well, yeah. A school teacher and an astronaut.
DOCTOR: Who's better qualified?
CLARA: I don't know! The President of America.
DOCTOR: Oh, take something off his plate. He makes far too many decisions anyway.
LUNDVIK: She.
DOCTOR: She. Sorry. She hasn't even been into space. She hasn't been to another planet. How would she even know what to do?
CLARA: I am asking you for help.
DOCTOR: Listen, we went to dinner in Berlin in 1937, right? We didn't nip out after pudding and kill Hitler. I've never killed Hitler. And you wouldn't expect me to kill Hitler. The future is no more malleable than the past.
CLARA: Okay, don't you do this to make some kind of point.
DOCTOR: Sorry. Well, actually, no, I'm not sorry. It's time to take the stabilisers off your bike. It's your moon, womankind. It's your choice.
CLARA: And you're just going to stand there?
DOCTOR: Absolutely not.
(The Tardis arrives, and Courtney comes out.)
CLARA: Doctor?
DOCTOR: A teenager, an astronaut and a schoolteacher.
LUNDVIK: Hang on a minute. We can get in there, can't we? You can sort it out with that thing.
DOCTOR: No. Some decisions are too important not to make on your own.
CLARA: Doctor. Doctor? Doctor!
(The Doctor goes into the Tardis and shuts the door. It dematerialises.)
LUNDVIK: Oh, what a prat.
(Another moonquake. The germs come flooding onto the surface from new fissures.)
LUNDVIK: I'm going to detonate the bombs, agreed? Agreed?
(A porthole breaks and the air rushes out.)
LUNDVIK: Hang on tight, there's been a breach!
(The vacuum sucks a handy piece of metal over the hole and seals it.)
CLARA: If we let it live, what would happen if the moon wasn't there?
LUNDVIK: Listen, we haven't got time for this.
CLARA: We're discussing it! What would happen if the moon wasn't there?
COURTNEY: I have a physics book in my bag. There's this thing on gravity?
LUNDVIK: Super. Is there a word search?
CLARA: Okay, there would be no tides. But we'd survive that, right? They've knocked out the satellites. There's no internet, no mobiles. I'd be fine with that.
LUNDVIK: It's not going to just stop being there, because inside the moon, Miss, is a gigantic creature forcing its way out. And when it does, which is going to be pretty damn soon, there are going to be huge chunks of the moon heading right for us, like whatever killed the dinosaurs, only ten thousand times bigger.
CLARA: But the moon isn't make of rock and stone, is it? It's made of eggshell.
LUNDVIK: Oh, God. Okay, okay, fine. If, by some miracle, the shell isn't too thick, or if it disperses, or if it goes into orbit, whatever, there's still going to be a massive thing there, isn't there, that just popped out. And what the hell do you imagine that is?
COURTNEY: Loads of things lay eggs.
LUNDVIK: It's not a chicken.
COURTNEY: I'm not saying it's a chicken. I'm not completely stupid.
LUNDVIK: It's an exoparasite.
COURTNEY: A what?
LUNDVIK: Like a flea. Or a head louse.
CLARA: I'm going to have to be a lot more certain than that if I'm going to kill a baby.
LUNDVIK: Oh, you want to talk about babies?. You've probably got babies down there now. You want to have babies?
CLARA: Well, yeah.
COURTNEY: Mister Pink.
CLARA: Shush!
LUNDVIK: Okay. You imagine you've got children down there on Earth now, right? Grandchildren maybe. You want that thing to get out? Kill them all? You want today to be the day life on Earth stopped because you couldn't make an unfair decision? Listen, I don't want to do this. All my life I've dreamed about coming here. But this is how it has to end.
(Lundvik sets the trigger.)
COURTNEY: Oi!
LUNDVIK: I've given us an hour. There's a cut-out here. If anyone has any bright ideas, or if he comes back, that stops it. But once it's pressed, it stays pressed.
CLARA: And if he doesn't come back?
LUNDVIK: I didn't expect to survive anyway.
COURTNEY: He's going to come back, though, right? Isn't he, Miss?
CLARA: Hey, why don't you call me Clara?
COURTNEY: I prefer Miss, Miss. We just need to make up our minds, that's all. Well, you know him.
CLARA: I think he really might just be leaving it to us.
(The communications system on the computer console crackles.)
MCKEAN [OC]: Can anybody hear me? Come in, please. Can anybody 
LUNDVIK: Lundvik.
MCKEAN [on monitor]: This is ground control.
LUNDVIK: Yeah, yeah, I can tell by your haircut. How are things down there?
MCKEAN [on monitor]: Pretty bad. Yeah. Pretty bad. Listen, we're patched in to one of the TV satellites. We haven't got long. How are things up there?
CLARA: Can we broadcast on this?
MCKEAN [on monitor]: Who are you?
CLARA: School trip. Can we broadcast on this?
MCKEAN [on monitor]: Well, yes.
(And now we have caught up to the teaser.)
CLARA: Hello, Earth. We have a terrible decision to make. It's an uncertain decision and we don't have a lot of time. We can kill this creature or we can let it live. We don't know what it's going to do, we don't know what's going to happen when it hatches. If it will hurt us, help us, or just leave us alone. We have to decide together. This is the last time we'll be able to speak to you, but you can send us a message. If you think we should kill the creature, turn your lights off. If you think we should take the chance, let it live, leave your lights on. We'll be able to see. Goodnight, Earth.
(Transmission ends.)
CLARA: Was that okay?
COURTNEY: Yeah.
(Bang! The lights flicker. Clara takes Courtney's hand.)
CLARA: Come on. Let's see.
(Lundvik picks up the trigger case and they walk along a corridor. The moon shakes and the power fluctuates. They run to a porthole as something explodes in flames behind them, and Clara looks out at the Earth with a small pair of binoculars. The only visible artificial lights are of course Europe and the Americas. Africa, Asia and Australia don't get a vote in this. Thirty nine minutes to go, then thirty two. Lights go out across the world. Eighteen minutes, five. The planet finishes going dark.)
COURTNEY: Night, night.
CLARA: Oh, Doctor, where have you gone?
LUNDVIK: We can't risk it all just to be nice.
CLARA: Okay.
COURTNEY: Miss?
LUNDVIK: Nine seconds.
COURTNEY: You can't!
LUNDVIK: Sorry, girls. See you on the other side. Two
(Clara hits the cut-out switch. Detonation aborted.)
LUNDVIK: Hey!
(The Tardis materialises.)
DOCTOR: One, two, three, into the Tardis.
LUNDVIK: What's happening?
DOCTOR: Let's go and have a look, shall we?

[Tardis]

(The Doctor sets the Tardis flying.)
LUNDVIK: Bloody idiots. Bloody irresponsible idiots.
(The Doctor walks over to her.)
DOCTOR: Mind your language, please, There are children present.
LUNDVIK: You should have left me there, let me die. I wanted to die up there with the universe in front of me, not being crushed to death on Earth.
DOCTOR: Nobody's going to die.
LUNDVIK: Could you please let us see what's happening?

[Beach]

(The Tardis lands on a Lanzarote beach below a full moon in a bright blue sky with fluffy white clouds. The moon is falling apart as the baby spreads its wings.)
COURTNEY: What's it doing?
(There is a faint image of a giant winged creature in the sky, making noises.)
DOCTOR: It's feeling the sun on itself. It's getting warm. The chick flies away and the eggshell disintegrates. Harmless.
CLARA: Did you know?
DOCTOR: You made your decision. Humanity made its choice.
LUNDVIK: No, we ignored humanity.
DOCTOR: Well, there you go.
LUNDVIK: So what happens now, then? Tell me what happens now.
(The Doctor turns his back on them and closes his eyes briefly.)
DOCTOR: In the mid-twenty first century humankind starts creeping off into the stars, spreads its way through the galaxy to the very edges of the universe. And it endures till the end of time.
(He turns back to them,)
DOCTOR: And it does all that because one day in the year 2049, when it had stopped thinking about going to the stars, something occurred that make it look up, not down. It looked out there into the blackness and it saw something beautiful, something wonderful, that for once it didn't want to destroy. And in that one moment, the whole course of history was changed. Not bad for a girl from Coal Hill School, and her teacher.
COURTNEY: Oh, my gosh. It laid a new egg. It's beautiful. Doctor, it's beautiful.
DOCTOR: That's what we call a new moon.
(A blank white round thing in the sky waiting for fresh meteorites to start decorating its surface.)
COURTNEY: You can be the first woman on that.
DOCTOR: I think that somebody deserves a thank you.
LUNDVIK: Yeah, probably. (to Clara) Thank you. Thank you for stopping me. Thank you for giving me the moon back.
DOCTOR: Okay, Captain. Well, you've got a whole new space programme to get together. NASA is er, it's that way. About two and a half thousand miles. (to Courtney) You still got your vortex manipulators? I'll give you a run home.

[Tardis]

(Courtney and Clara come back upstairs from below the console after getting changed back into their school clothes. The Doctor is dropping books on the steps to the gallery.)
DOCTOR: Not that it's any of my business, but I think you did the right thing.
CLARA: Yeah, you're right. It's none of your business. Come on, Courtney, off you go. Double Geography.
COURTNEY: Can we do it again?
CLARA: Go. Go, go. Chop chop.
(Courtney leaves the Tardis, and the Doctor sets it flying. Clara stops it.)
CLARA: Tell me what you knew.
DOCTOR: Nothing. I told you, I've got grey areas.
CLARA: Yeah. I noticed. Tell me what you knew, Doctor, or else I'll smack you so hard you'll regenerate.
DOCTOR: I knew that eggs are not bombs. I know they don't usually destroy their nests. Essentially, what I knew was that you would always make the best choice. I had faith that you would always make the right choice.
CLARA: Honestly, do you have music playing in your head when you say rubbish like that?
DOCTOR: It wasn't my decision to make. I told you.
CLARA: Well, why did you do it? Was it for Courtney, was that it?
DOCTOR: Well, she really is something special now, isn't she? First woman on the moon, saved the Earth from itself, and, rather bizarrely, she becomes the President of the United States. She met this bloke called Blinovitch
(Check out the Blinovitch Limitation Effect on Tardis.Wikia.com)
CLARA: Do you know what? Shut up! I am so sick of listening to you!
DOCTOR: Well, I didn't do it for Courtney. I didn't know what was going to happen. Do you think I'm lying?
(Clara is crying with rage.)
CLARA: I don't know. I don't know. If you didn't do it for her, I mean. Do you know what? It was, it was cheap, it was pathetic. No, no, no. It was patronising. That was you patting us on the back, saying, you're big enough to go to the shops by yourself now. Go on, toddle along.
DOCTOR: No, that was me allowing you to make a choice about your own future. That was me respecting you.
CLARA: Oh, my God, really? Was it? Yeah, well, respected is not how I feel.
DOCTOR: Right. Okay. Er.
CLARA: I nearly didn't press that button. I nearly got it wrong. That was you, my friend, making me scared. Making me feel like a bloody idiot.
DOCTOR: Language.
CLARA: Oh, don't you ever tell me to mind my language. Don't you ever tell me to take the stabilisers off my bike. And don't you dare lump me in with the rest of all the little humans that you think are so tiny and silly and predictable. You walk our Earth, Doctor, you breathe our air. You make us your friend, and that is your moon too. And you can damn well help us when we need it.
DOCTOR: I was helping.
CLARA: What, by clearing off?
DOCTOR: Yes.
CLARA: Yeah, well, clear off! Go on. You can clear off. Get back in your lonely, your lonely bloody Tardis and you don't come back.
DOCTOR: Clara. Clara.
CLARA: You go away. Okay? You go a long way away.
(Clara slams the door shut behind her. The Tardis dematerialises as she leaves the store cupboard, leaving a few papers flying around in the resulting breeze as the air rushes into the hole it has left.)

[English classroom]

(The study book this time is David Copperfield, according to the white board.)
DANNY: Hello.
CLARA: Hey. Now then.
DANNY: What've you been up to?
CLARA: The usual.
DANNY: It happened, didn't it?
(A little later, after she has told it all from her point of view.)
CLARA: Well, he was wrong, wasn't he? Wasn't he? Danny, what do you think?
DANNY: I think I've seen this look before.
CLARA: No, you haven't. This is new for me.
DANNY: No, not on your face. On mine.
CLARA: What did you do?
DANNY: I left the army.
CLARA: You loved the army.
DANNY: Yep. And then one day I didn't.
CLARA: I'm done, I'm done. I am finished with it. I am, I am, I'm done. It's over. I'm finished with him, and I told him that. What is that face for? Why don't you believe me?
DANNY: Because you're still angry. You can never finish with anyone while they can still make you angry. Tell him when you're calm, and then tell me.
(Clara hugs him.)
CLARA: When did you get to become so wise?
DANNY: Same way as anyone else. I had a really bad day.
(Clara goes home with her shopping and pours herself a glass of red wine, then looks out of the window at the impossibly big full moon with exactly the same crater markings as the old one.)


(Images of the number 66, an incandescent light bulb fickers, then a traditional horror film mummy is roaring and reaching for us -)
DOCTOR [OC]: Start the clock.

[Restaurant coach]

(The numbers count down near the bottom of the screen. A young woman in traditional black and white maids uniform walks down the central aisle of a steam train's restaurant coach. It is the 1920s, and the whistle blows. At 52 seconds, an old woman looks up, then lowers her lorgnette and speaks to the fashionable young lady opposite.)
MRS PITT: Is there some sort of fancy dress thing on this evening?
MAISIE: I don't think so. Why do you ask?
MRS PITT: Well, that fellow over there, dressed as a mummy monster thing.
MAISIE: Who do you mean? I can't see him.
(The mummy reaches for Mrs Pitt. She summons the head waiter.)
MRS PITT: You! You! Throw that man out of my dining car. It's disgusting.
WAITER: I'm sorry, Madam. Which man?
MRS PITT: Which man?! I'll have your job. That man, right there, dressed as a monster.
(The head waiter walks away.)
MAISIE: Mama, there isn't anyone there. Are you feeling okay?
MRS PITT: Don't you dare lie to me, girl. I won't be made a fool of. Stop it. Stop it. Stop him at once. Right now.
MAISIE: Mama, there's no one there. You're worrying me. Do you want one of your pills?
MRS PITT: Oh, no! Get it off! Get it off!
(Zero. The mummy puts its hands Mrs Pitt's head and she goes limp. Maisie stands up.)
MAISIE: Oh! Is there a doctor? Sorry, I need a doctor. Sorry, I don't know. She just, she just stopped.
(A man comes over to check on Mrs Pitt as the steam whistle blows. The camera moves back through the window to show us the name of the train - Orient Express - as it hurtles on through space.)

[Baggage car]

(The Tardis materialises in a space at the back of the car, amidst racks of suitcases, and the Doctor steps out wearing a black suit with a white handkerchief in the breast pocket and a loose bow tie with very long ends, sort of Western style. He holds out his hand to his companion, a fashionable flapper with jaw-length bobbed hair.)
DOCTOR: Your train awaits, my lady.
CLARA: Wonderful.
DOCTOR: The baggage car. But thanks for lying. The real wonderful is through here.
(The train's bell rings. Music is coming from nearby.)
DOCTOR: There were many trains to take the name Orient Express, but only one in space.

[Lounge]

(Comfortable chairs down the side of the carriage, a bar at one end, and armed men standing guard. The band is playing a slow jazz version of Don't Stop Me Now by Queen. The singer is a young lady called Foxes, so that's what I'll call her instead of just Singer.)
CLARA: Of course it is.
FOXES: (sings) So don't stop me now.
DOCTOR: Completely faithful recreation of the original Orient Express. Except slightly bigger. And in space. Oh, and the rails are actually hyperspace ribbons. But in every other respect, identical. Painstaking attention to detail.
(A man with a bald head, big red beard and steampunk eyepatch barges in between them.)
FOXES: (sings) I'm a rocket ship on my way to Mars
DOCTOR: Most of the time.
(The Doctor rubs his bruised arm.)
FOXES: (sings) On a collision course I am a satellite, I'm out of control. I'm a sex machine ready to reload. Like an atom bomb about to oh, oh, oh
DOCTOR: You're doing it again.
CLARA: Doing what?
DOCTOR: The smile.
CLARA: Yeah, I'm smiling.
DOCTOR: It's the sad smile. It's a smile but you're sad. It's confusing. It's like two emotions at once. It's like you're malfunctioning.
CLARA: Sorry.
FOXES: (sings) Travelling at the speed of light. Wanna make a supersonic woman of you.
DOCTOR: I just thought this would be a good one to
CLARA: To end it. Yeah. It is. It's a good choice. A good one to end on.
DOCTOR: Yeah?
CLARA: Mmm hmm.
DOCTOR: Shall we?
(The maid approaches with a tray of champagne flutes. The Doctor offers Clara his arm.)
CLARA: Mmm hmm,.
FOXES: (sings) Gimme a call. Don't stop me now Don't stop me.
(An indicator changes from a monocle to a thumbs up with a ting! The onboard computer speaks.)
GUS: Ladies and gentlemen. If you would be good enough to look from the windows on the right of the train, you'll be able to see the soaring majesty of the Magellan black hole.
DOCTOR: Oh, I remember when this was all planets as far as the eye could see. All gone now. Gobbled up by that beast. And there's that smile again. I don't even know how you do that. CLARA: I really thought I hated you, you know?
DOCTOR: Well, thank God you kept that to yourself. There was this planet, Obsidian. The planet of perpetual darkness.
CLARA: I did. I did hate you. In fact, I hated you for weeks.
DOCTOR: Good, fine. Well, I'm glad that we cleared that up. There was also a planet that was made completely of shrubs.
CLARA: I went to a concert once. Can't remember who it was. But do you know what the singer said?
DOCTOR: Frankly, that would be an absolutely astonishing guess if I did know.
CLARA: She said, "hatred is too strong an emotion to waste on someone that you don't like."
(I thought that was a Sixto Rodriguez quote, but don't mind me.)
DOCTOR: Were people really confused? Cos I'm confused. Did everybody leave?
CLARA: Shush. Shut up. Look, what I'm trying to say is, I don't hate you. I could never hate you. But I can't do this any more. Not the way you do it.
DOCTOR: Can I talk about the planets now?
CLARA: Yes. Go.
DOCTOR: Thedion Four. Constant acid rain. Had a lovely picnic there once, wearing a gas mask.
MAISIE: That's a lie.
CLARA: I'm sorry?
MAISIE: That's a lie, what you said. Thedion Four was destroyed thousands of years ago, so you couldn't have been there.
(The chief train guard comes over. He wears a uniform with two medals, lots of gold frogging and has a gun in a holster.)
QUELL: Miss Pitt, are you sure you wouldn't rather rest in your room?
MAISIE: That man's a liar.
QUELL: Perhaps you'd allow Mister Carlyle here to escort you back.
(Another uniformed guard.)
CARLYLE: It'll be all right, miss. Just come with me.
QUELL: Sorry about that. I suppose it's understandable in the circumstances. I don't believe we've been introduced. Captain Quell.
CLARA: I'm Clara. This is the Doctor.
QUELL: Ah, another one.
CLARA: Sorry? Another what?
QUELL: Well, we've got doctors and professors coming out of our ears on this trip. So, what are you a doctor of?
DOCTOR: Now, there's a question that's never asked often enough. Let's say intestinal parasites.
QUELL: I'm beginning to think Miss Pitt was right about you.
CLARA: What's wrong with her? Did something happen?
QUELL: You mean you really don't know?

[Corridor]

(They take their champagne out into the corridor to talk.)
CLARA: There's a body and there's a mummy. I mean, can you not just get on a train? Did a wizard put a curse on you about mini-breaks?
DOCTOR: It might be nothing. Old ladies die all the time. It's practically their job description.
CLARA: And the monster?
DOCTOR: Well, seen by no one except her, which suggests that it wasn't there. A dying brain, lack of oxygen, hallucinations. Anyway, people do just die sometimes. She was over a hundred years old.
CLARA: Says the two thousand year old man.
DOCTOR: Clara, you actually sound as if you want this to be a thing. Do you?
CLARA: No. No, look, fine. You know, if you think that there is nothing to worry about, then that is fine by me.
DOCTOR: Are you sure?
CLARA: Ah, yes, I'm sure.
DOCTOR: To our last hurrah.
CLARA: Our last, yeah. I mean, it's not like I'm never going to see you again.
DOCTOR: Isn't it?
CLARA: Is it?
DOCTOR: I thought that's what you wanted.
CLARA: No, what I mean, you're going to come round for dinner or something, aren't you? Do you, do you do that? Do you come round to people's houses for dinner?
DOCTOR: Of course. Why wouldn't I do that?
CLARA: I don't know. I thought you might find it boring.
DOCTOR: Is it boring?
CLARA: No.
(She raises her champagne flute.)
CLARA: To the last hurrah.
DOCTOR: The last hurrah.
(Clink.)

[Doctor's sleeping compartment]

(The Doctor is lying down on his bed. He flexes his fingers and argues with himself.)
DOCTOR: It's nothing. Nothing. Definitely. Sure. Ninety nine percent sure. Really? Ninety nine percent? That's quite high. Is that the figure you're sticking with? Okay, okay. Seventy five. Well, that's jumped quite a bit. You've just lost twenty four percent.

[Clara's sleeping compartment]

(Clara is in her room, in silk pajamas and making a phone call.)
DANNY [OC]: A train in space? Sounds pretty cool.
CLARA: So, what are you saying? Just because he brought me somewhere cool, I shouldn't dump him?

[Danny's flat]

(He's ready for bed, too.)
DANNY: Well, one, you can't dump him because he's not your boyfriend.

[Clara's sleeping compartment]

DANNY [OC]: And two, dumping him sounds a little scorched earth.

[Danny's flat]

DANNY: You still basically get on.

[Clara's sleeping compartment]

DANNY [OC]: I think you should just enjoy your space

[Danny's flat]

DANNY: Train. At least it's not dangerous.

[Clara's sleeping compartment]

CLARA: Yeah. It's pretty boring, really.

[Doctor's sleeping compartment]

DOCTOR: Because you know what this sounds like, don't you? No, do tell me. A mummy that only the victim can see. I was being rhetorical. I know exactly what this sounds like.
(He puts on his jacket and goes out into the corridor. )

[Corridor]

(The Doctor hesitates outside Clara's door, nearly knocks, then walks on. Clara comes out and knocks on the Doctor's door.)
CLARA (whispering): Doctor, are you awake?

[Engineer's carriage]

(Computer screens above a workbench, blueprints on a draughting table. Racks of tools. The Doctor finds a piece of equipment bubbling to itself, and apparently powering up according to the display. He removes the plastic wrapping and scans it with the screwdriver. The Chief Engineer startles him.)
PERKINS: Beautiful bit of kit, isn't it, sir? The Excelsior Life Extender. It's like driving around in a portable hospital.
(Perkins is holding a heavy piece of metal.)
DOCTOR: Yes, well, it didn't do Mrs Pitt much good, did it?
PERKINS: Got me there, sir. Certainly got me there. Maybe it malfunctioned.
DOCTOR: Oh, I don't think so. The records show that the machine did everything it could to keep her alive.
PERKINS: Yeah. And almost drained the battery doing it.
DOCTOR: What do you know?
PERKINS: Well, I know that when I find a man fiddling with a chair that someone died in, it's best to play my cards close to my chest.
DOCTOR: Really? Well, I know that when I find a man loitering near a chair that someone died in, I do just the same.
PERKINS: Perkins. Chief Engineer.
DOCTOR: The Doctor. Nosey Parker.
PERKINS: (chuckles) Pleased to meet you, Doctor.
(They shake hands.)
PERKINS: Course, there's a rumour that someone or some thing else might be responsible.

[Corridor]

(Clara has got dressed and come out of her sleeping compartment again. She meets Maisie walking along in her pajamas and holding her right shoe in her hand, and follows her.)
CLARA: Hello? Are you okay? Hello? Excuse me? Excuse me?

[Baggage car]

CLARA: Miss Pitt, wasn't it? Are you all right? Do you need some help?
MAISIE: My name's Maisie. I'm not mad.
CLARA: Oh, okay. Er, I didn't say you were, but you've had a bad day. I think anybody could do with a little bit of help after a day like today.
(Maisie addresses the panel next to a heavy door at the end of the baggage car. It is labelled Private Company Property)
MAISIE: Computer, open the door.
GUS: Call me Gus. I'm afraid this door can only be opened by executive order.
(The thumbs down icon makes a sad noise.)
CLARA: Are you okay?
(Maisie cries as she tries pressing buttons on the keypad.)
MAISIE: They won't let me see her body. They should let me see her body, shouldn't they?
CLARA: Er, yeah, I should think so. It's in there, is it? Okay, I have a friend who's really good with locks. Do you want to come with me, see if we can find him?
MAISIE: Oh!
(Maisie slams the heel of her shoe into the door key pad and shorts it out. The icon changes to a telescope on a tripod, then the thumbs down, then cannot make up its mind. The door opens.)
CLARA: Or you could do that because that works, too.
(Clara follows Maisie into the room and the door closes behind them.)

[Lounge]

(The Doctor walks up to a man with a thin moustache who is reading a book, and points at him.)
DOCTOR: What's the most interesting thing about the Foretold?
MOORHOUSE: I'm terribly sorry, I don't believe we've met.
DOCTOR: You know. The Foretold. Mythical mummy. Legend has it that if you see it, you're a dead man.
MOORHOUSE: Yes, I know what it is. You see, I happen to be
DOCTOR: Emil Moorhouse, professor of alien mythology. I'm the Doctor. Pleased to meet you. So, the most interesting thing about the Foretold. Go.
(The Doctor sits down on the other side of Moorhouse's small table.)
MOORHOUSE: Er, well, it would have to be the time limit given before it kills you. I can't think of another myth where it's so specific. How does it go? Er, The number of evil twice over. They that bear the Foretold's stare have sixty six seconds to live.
DOCTOR: No, no, no. Nice try. Very atmospheric. But that's not it. Try again.
MOORHOUSE: A cynical man might say that you were trying to pump me for information.
DOCTOR: The myth of the Foretold first appeared over five thousand years ago. In some stories, there is a riddle or secret word that is supposed to make it stop. Some characters try to bargain with it, offer riches, confess sins. All to no avail.
(The Doctor opens the silver cigarette case he has taken from his jacket pocket and offers the Professor a jelly baby.)
MOORHOUSE: Well, you certainly know a little mythology.
DOCTOR: I know a lot. Because, from time to time, it turns out to be true.

[Galley]

(The light flickers, the clock starts ticking, and the chef sees the mummy.)
CHEF: What is that?
CHEF 2: What?
CHEF: What is that?

[Lounge]

MOORHOUSE: But that's the great appeal, isn't it?

[Galley]

CHEF: Can't you see?

[Saloon car]

MOORHOUSE: Earth legends are such dry, dusty affairs, and always fiction. But up here, in the stars,

[Galley]

(The unfortunate chef tries to use trolleys to stop the mummy from getting to him.)
CHEF 2: What are you talking about?
CHEF: Get it away!

[Saloon car]

MOORHOUSE: Anything's possible. That's why I chose this field, to be honest. Hoping one day I might meet a real monster.
DOCTOR: Isn't that everyone's dream? But you still haven't answered my riddle. What's the most interesting thing about the Foretold?
MOORHOUSE: Well, you can't run from it, that's for sure. There are accounts of people trying, but it never works. No matter how far you run, it's always right there behind you.

[Galley]

CHEF 2: There's nothing there!
CHEF: Can't you see it?
CHEF 3: Calm down.
(The chef grabs a big knife.)
CHEF: Get it away! Get it away!
CHEF 2: What's wrong with him?
CHEF: Get it away! Get it away!
(At 18 seconds he retreats into the freezer.)
CHEF: Get it away! Get it away!
CHEF 2: What is going on?
CHEF 3: Stumpy, open the door.
CHEF 2: Yeah, open the door.
(The mummy is inside the freezer, behind him.)
CHEF 2: Get out!
CHEF: Argh!
CHEF 2: He's unhinged!
(2, 1, the mummy reaches for the chef's head and he screams.)
CHEF 2: No! Stumpy!

[Saloon car]

DOCTOR: Nope. Even colder.
MOORHOUSE: All right, I give up, you tell me.
DOCTOR: Mrs Pitt, the old woman who died.
MOORHOUSE: She died of old age. Nothing supernatural.
DOCTOR: No. That's my answer.
MOORHOUSE: Her death?
DOCTOR: No. The fact that you were here to witness it.
(There is a commotion behind them.)
DOCTOR: Excuse me, Professor.
QUELL: In which carriage?

[Galley]

(The body of the chef is scanned in the freezer as Captain Quell lays down the law to the surviving staff.)
QUELL: It was a heart attack. And if I hear anyone spreading rumours to the contrary, they'll be getting off at the next station, termination papers in hand. Are we clear?
(The chef is zipped into his white body bag.)

[Strong room]

(Clara is taking the door lock apart and moving wires around. The only light is through the grill over a window.)
MAISIE: Do you know what you're doing?
CLARA: Nope. But I do need to be slightly more skilled than a high-heeled shoe.
MAISIE: Do you ever wish bad things on people?
CLARA: Oh, yeah. All the time. Whoever designed this door, for a start.
MAISIE: She wasn't really my mum. She just made me call her that. She was my gran. Do you know why I wanted to see her body?
CLARA: Because you loved her very much and were missing her?
MAISIE: (chuckles) No. You obviously never met her. No, I just felt really guilty. Like I'd been picturing her dying for years. Like a daydream. Not really meaning it. At least, I don't think I did. But now, it just feels like I made this happen.
(Clara abandons the lock.)
CLARA: Hey, listen. You didn't do anything wrong. Difficult people, they can make you feel all sorts of things. But you didn't do it. You didn't kill her. She just died.
MAISIE: Are you sure about that?
(They look at a large iron maiden or sarcophagus thing standing at the far end of the strong room. It has a large red shiny oval where the head would be and a single small red light.)

[Corridor]

DOCTOR: I think we need to talk.
QUELL: This matter does not concern the passengers.
DOCTOR: I'm not a passenger. I'm your worst nightmare.
(The Doctor hands Quell his psychic paper.)
QUELL: A mystery shopper. Oh, great.
DOCTOR: Really? That's your worst? Okay, I'm a mystery shopper. I could do with an extra pillow and I'm very disappointed with your breakfast bar and all of the dying.

[Quell's office]

(Quell gets two glasses and pours drinks. On the wall is a framed Certificate of Bravery awarded to Capt. Hector Quell by United Galaxy Tours. The time on the clock is 11:24)
QUELL: This is not exactly within your job description.
DOCTOR: Come on, Captain. Where would we all be if we all followed our job descriptions, hmm? Good question. Glad you asked. In your case, you'd be doing something instead of climbing inside a bottle.
QUELL: I have followed the procedure for accidental death to the letter.
DOCTOR: Yes, I'm sure you have. And I'm sure you do just enough of your job to avoid complaints.
QUELL: You don't know anything about me.
DOCTOR: Wounded in battle, honourable discharge. And this is just a guess, but I think you've had the fight knocked out of you. You expected this to be a cushy desk job where you could put your head down until retirement. Well, I'm sorry. As of today, that dream is over.
QUELL: There is no evidence of any attack or other parties
DOCTOR: Yes, let's just sit around and wait for the evidence while the bodies pile up. Or here's a crazy thought. We could do something to stop it. Why am I even talking to you?

[Corridor]

(Perkins is waiting outside with rolls of papers.)
PERKINS: Er, passenger manifest, plan of the train and a list of stops for the past six months.
DOCTOR: Quick work, Perkins. Maybe too quick.
PERKINS: Yes, sir. I'm obviously the mummy. Or perhaps I was already looking into this.

[Strong room]

(Maisie and Clara are sitting on a box or something, their backs against a wall.)
MAISIE: This Doctor. He's your what, exactly?
CLARA: He's not my anything.
MAISIE: Oh, you mean you're just friends.
CLARA: Yeah, Of course we're just friends. Oh. Well, not even friends, not any more.
MAISIE: Well, that clearly isn't true.
CLARA: It's true. It is. It's very true.
MAISIE: You do seem to be here together.
CLARA: Seriously? We're stuck in this carriage, probably all night, and all we can talk about is some man?
MAISIE: Some man?
CLARA: Not that kind of. Look, we, er, we knocked about together, we travelled and now we're stopping. This is a, I don't know, goodbye to the good times?
MAISIE: Were the good times all like this?
(Clara laughs a little.)
CLARA: Yeah. Now that you mention it

[Engineer's room]

(The Doctor is timing the recorded attack on Mrs Pitt, as recorded by CCTV, while Moorhouse and Perkins look on.)
MRS PITT [on screen]: No! No! Get it out! Argh!
DOCTOR: Sixty six seconds. It fits the myth. Did you see the lights flicker?
MOORHOUSE: Mmm.
PERKINS: Yeah, the lights went in the kitchen as well just before the chef saw it.
MOORHOUSE: In all of the accounts, conventional weapons have no effect on the Foretold. It's immortal, unstoppable, unkillable.
PERKINS: Can we get a new expert?
(The train continues on its way, trailing smoke.)

[Strong room]

MAISIE: Oh, he was wrong.
CLARA: Yes. Yes. Yes, he was.
MAISIE: And, and high-handed and, and thoughtless and, and, and arrogant beyond belief.
CLARA: Exactly.
MAISIE: And you got on a train with him.
CLARA: I was saying goodbye. You can't end it on a slammed door.
MAISIE: Yes, you can. Anyone can do it. People do it all the time. Except, of course, when they can't. (sigh) Life would be so much simpler if you liked the right people. People you're supposed to like. But then, I guess there'd be no fairy tales.
(In the Engineer's room, Moorhouse is sleeping in a chair, and Perkins is slumped at his desk. The Doctor is looking through papers when there is a beeping sound and the blinds are raised. It must be morning, train time. He takes the intercom phone off the wall and sonicks it, disconnects its cord from of the wall then calls Clara.)
CLARA: Doctor?
DOCTOR [OC]: Wake up

[Engineer's room]

DOCTOR: Sleepy-head. Time for breakfast. Knowing this train, it'll taste

[Strong room]

DOCTOR [OC]: Amazing.
CLARA: Doctor, please, I'm in trouble
DOCTOR [OC]: Can't even get that right, huh?
CLARA: Doctor

[Engineer's room]

DOCTOR: Bad food on trains is traditional.

[Strong room]

CLARA: Doctor, please, just li

[Engineer's room]

DOCTOR: Listen, there's been another mummy murder. So our last hurrah

[Strong room]

CLARA: Doc
DOCTOR [OC]: Just became a bit more interesting.
CLARA: I'm trapped!

[Engineer's room]

DOCTOR: What? Where are you?
(Perkins and Moorhouse wake up as the Doctor dashes out.)

[Baggage car]

(The Doctor hammers on the strong room door.)
DOCTOR: Clara!

[Strong room]

DOCTOR [OC]: Is that you?
CLARA: Yes. Yes. Hello. Can you hear us?

[Baggage car]

(The Doctor tries sonicking the lock and gets a shock.)
DOCTOR: Ow! Computer, can you open the door, please?
GUS: Call me Gus. I'm afraid this door can only be opened by executive order.
DOCTOR: Oh. Forget it.
(The Doctor tries scanning the door with the screwdriver. It stutters then stops.)
DOCTOR: Oh. Now the stupid sonic

[Strong room]

CLARA: What?
DOCTOR [OC]: Screwdriver's not working.
CLARA: What? What do you mean, it's not working? Why?
DOCTOR: I don't know. Some sort of a

[Baggage car]

DOCTOR: Suppression field, I would guess. And it has to be a guess because, as I say, the stupid sonic screwdriver's not working. What are you even

[Strong room]

DOCTOR [OC]: Doing in there?
CLARA: Well, I was looking for you

[Baggage car]

CLARA [OC]: Mister Nothing To Worry About.
DOCTOR: What, was I supposed to waken you up? Drag you out of bed

[Strong room]

DOCTOR [OC]: Because I had a hunch? I thought you didn't want to do this any more.
CLARA: Look, look, please, can we just not do this now? I think we might not be alone in here. (sotto) There's a sarcophagus.

[Baggage car]

DOCTOR: Is it in there?

[Strong room]

(The light on the front of the sarcophagus changes from red to green, there is the sound of air escaping and it starts to open.)
CLARA: I think we might just be about to find out. Turns out the sonic is working.

[Baggage car]

CLARA [OC]: Just not on the door we need.
(The lights flicker. The clock at the bottom of the screen starts counting down from 66.)
DOCTOR: Clara, it's coming.
(The Doctor is works frantically on the lock.)

[Strong room]

(Clara walks up to the sarcophagus.)
CLARA: Doctor?
(The sarcophagus lid swings fully open.)
CLARA: Doctor, it's okay. It's er, it's full of bubble wrap.
(With flashing red lights behind it.)

[Baggage car]

DOCTOR: But the lights?
QUELL: Doctor, move away from the door.
(Quell points at the Doctor. Two other armed guards are with him, one pointing a gun.)
DOCTOR: My friend's inside.
QUELL: Then they're in trouble, too. I spoke to Head Office. There is no mystery shopper. You're not even on the passenger list.
DOCTOR: Clara, I'm going to have to call you back.
QUELL: Come on.
(30 seconds. They handcuff the Doctor.)
DOCTOR: You know, I'm going to have to mark you down for this.
QUELL: You are not a mystery shopper. For all I know, you're the one behind the killings.
DOCTOR: Oh, come on, Captain. How many people have to die before you stop looking the other way?

[Lounge]

(A guard is shooting at something only he can see.)
GUARD: Get back! Stay back!
(His shots break glasses on tables. Nine seconds.)
QUELL: What do you think you're doing, man?
GUARD: Please, please! Stop! No
QUELL: Get up, man. That's an order!
(The mummy holds the guard's head, then he falls back. The doctor in the white coat and Edward VII beard checks for a pulse and shakes his head. Moorhouse give Quell the guard's gun. He hands it off to another guard.)
QUELL: It turns out it's three. The amount of people that had to die before I stopped looking the other way.
(The Doctor is released.)
DOCTOR: Thank you.
PERKINS: Same as the others?
(He has appeared suddenly and silently at the Doctor's elbow.)
GUARD: Excuse me please. Take his feet. Excuse me please.
(The other guards carry their late colleague away.)
DOCTOR: Ladies and gentlemen, could I have a moment of your time, please? There's a monster on this train that can only be seen by those about to die. If you do see it, you will have exactly sixty six seconds left in which to live. But that isn't even the strangest thing. Do you know what is? You. The passengers. Experts in alien biology, mythology, physics. If I was putting together a team to analyse this thing, I'd pick you. And I think somebody has. Someone of immense power and influence has orchestrated this whole trip. Someone who I have no doubt is listening to us right now. So, are you going to step out from behind the curtain and give us our orders?
PERKINS: The engines. They've stopped.
(In a flurry of electronic activity, the 1920s railway carriage decor is replaced by a high-tech laboratory.)
DOCTOR: And the facade drops away because what use are a bunch of scientists without a lab?
(A large number of people disappear. One of those remaining looks remarkably like Albert Einstein.)
PERKINS: Teleporter?
DOCTOR: No. Hard light holograms. They were never really here. Fake passengers to make up the numbers.
(Hard light? Red Dwarf!)
QUELL: That was my best guard.
(Ting! The thumbs up icon on a monitor is replaced by a monocle.)
GUS: Good morning, everyone. Around the room you will find a variety of scientific equipment. Your goal is to ascertain the Foretold's true nature, probe for weaknesses with a view to capture, after which we will reverse engineer its abilities. Isn't this exciting?
DOCTOR: You said capture, implying that you can't control this thing. And yet somehow you got it on board. How?
GUS: There is an artefact, an ancient scroll. I have highlighted it for your convenience. For reasons currently unknown, the Foretold appears in the vicinity of this artefact.
(A small spotlight turns to illuminate the scroll on the door at the end of the car. It has cuneiform writing on it, which is interesting as that is really marks made in moist clay, not painted on papyrus or fabric.)
DOCTOR: And kills at regular intervals.
QUELL: Then just maybe we should throw this thing out in the airlock.
DOCTOR: No! No! No!
(Quell gets an electric shock when he tries to touch the scroll.)
PERKINS: Looks like they've thought of that.
MOORHOUSE: What if we say no? Down tools. Refuse to work.
GUS: That is your choice, of course. But it would be very upsetting were you all to die at the hands of the Foretold.
PERKINS: So hurry up, before it kills you.
DOCTOR: But even if they agree to this, how are they supposed to study a creature that they can't even see? We don't even know what the species is.
(The light flickers.)
DOCTOR: Perkins, start the clock.
MOORHOUSE: Approximately one point eight metres tall. Actually, seeing it in the flesh isn't nearly as rewarding as I thought it might be.
(The mummy drags its left foot as it approaches.)
DOCTOR: Oh, dear. Hard cheese. What can you see? Details.
MOORHOUSE: Yes. Yes, of course, of course. Uh Well, it just looks like er, a man in bandages. I
DOCTOR: What kind of bandages? Old? New?
MOORHOUSE: Old.
DOCTOR: Whole? Ragged?
MOORHOUSE: Ragged. Falling off in places. I don't know what you want me to tell you.
DOCTOR: Listen to me! You can see this thing. We can't. Tell us what you can see. Even the smallest detail might help save the next one.
MOORHOUSE: The next one? You mean you can't save me?
DOCTOR: Well, that is implied, isn't it? Yes, this is probably the end for you. But make it count. Details, please.
MOORHOUSE: Er, flesh. Some of it is visible
PERKINS: Thirty seconds.
MOORHOUSE: Er, leathery. Ancient looking. Peat bog preserved.
DOCTOR: Keep talking. Don't waste this chance.
MOORHOUSE: I want to bargain for my life.
DOCTOR: W-w-w-what?
MOORHOUSE: Well, it says, some of the myths say if you, if you find the right word, if you make the right offer, then it lets you go.
DOCTOR: This is not a myth. This is real. Forget your superstitions. Tell us what you can see.
MOORHOUSE: This is my life, my death. I'm going to fight for it how I want. Er, I give you
PERKINS: Ten seconds.
MOORHOUSE: My soul. I confess all sins. I give you all my worldly goods. Only, please, please, please. No!
(The mummy holds Moorhouse's head, then he falls.)
PERKINS: Zero.
GUS: We apologise for any distress you may have just experienced. Grief counselling is available on request. On the bright side, I'm sure you've all collected a lot of data. Well done, everyone!
PERKINS: It's recording every death.
DOCTOR: Of course it is. That's why we're here. To study our own demise. So let's get to work. Come on. Chop, chop.
(The Doctor hands out white lab coats. Later, the phone rings. The bald man checks his inside pocket.)
DOCTOR: Clara Oswald.

[Strong room]

(Clara and Maisie are going through some papers they have found in a box.)
CLARA: Okay. So, first things first. The sarcophagus is actually a secure stasis unit.

[Laboratory]

(No point in calling it the lounge anymore.)
DOCTOR: Yes. It's where they want us to put the Foretold if we

[Strong room]

DOCTOR [OC]: Capture it.
CLARA: Well, that would have been good to know.
DOCTOR [OC]: Sorry.

[Laboratory]

DOCTOR: Teeny bit busy round here. What else?
GUS: Please terminate your call and return to work.
CLARA [OC]: We have some paperwork. Passenger manifests from

[Strong room]

CLARA: Other ships. Maisie recognised a couple of the names. These are missing ships.
DOCTOR [OC]: So, we're not the first.
CLARA: No.

[Laboratory]

GUS: Please terminate your call and return to work.
CLARA [OC]: I've got some progress reports.

[Strong room]

CLARA: The Gloriana spent three days getting picked off by the Foretold. All died. Performance marked as poor.

[Galley]

GUS: Warning. Decompression imminent. Please vacate the area.
CHEF 2: No!

[Secure room]

CLARA: The Valiant Heart. Forty two crew, four died.

[Laboratory]

CLARA [OC]: Performance, promising.
GUS: Please terminate the call and return to work.
QUELL: I think you should do as it says.
(Because the catering staff and equipment are floating past the window.)
DOCTOR: Clara, I have to go.
GUS: I'm sorry. I know that must have been distressing for you. But if you are disobedient again, I will decompress another area containing less valuable passengers.
DOCTOR: Less valuable passengers? How does it choose?
PERKINS: Well, I'm assuming qualifications
DOCTOR: No, no, no. Not the computer, the Foretold. How does it choose who to kill? We've assumed it's random. What if it's not? I want full histories on all the victims. Medical, social, personal.
GUS: Well done.
DOCTOR: Don't mention it.
(Later, looking at a tablet computer.)
PERKINS: Doesn't seem to be any pattern. Their travel history, interests, health. It's all over the shop. Health?
DOCTOR: Health? Are you sure? Mrs Pitt, the first victim. She was over a hundred years old. The frailest passenger on board.
PERKINS: Oh but the next to go, the chef, was young and fit. It's random.
QUELL: The chef was ill.
DOCTOR: What?
QUELL: A rare blood disorder. Not contagious, but we kept it quiet.
DOCTOR: Because he worked with food. The next one, the guard?
QUELL: He wasn't ill as such, but he did have synthetic lungs implanted last year.
PERKINS: Professor Moorhouse. It seems he was physically fine but suffering from, here we are. Regular panic attacks after a car crash last year.
DOCTOR: It's picking off the weakest first. Sensing the illness somehow. The fake organs, even psychological issues. But this is good news, because it means we can work out who is next. I want the medical records of everybody alive who is still on board. If anyone's had as much as a cold, I want to know about it.
QUELL: You really think it can sense psychological issues?
DOCTOR: It seems so. Why?
QUELL: When you said I'd lost the stomach for a fight, I wasn't wounded in battle as such, but. My unit was bombed. I was the sole survivor. Not a scratch on me. But post-traumatic stress. Nightmares. Still can't sleep without pills.
DOCTOR: Which means that you are probably next. Which is good to know.
QUELL: Well, not for me.
DOCTOR: Well, of course not for you, because you're going to die. But I mean for us, from a research point of view.
QUELL: You know, for a doctor, your bedside manner leaves
(Lights flicker.)
DOCTOR: Well, there's goes our head start. Perkins, start the clock.
(The mummy appears at the far end of the carriage.)
DOCTOR: What can you see?
QUELL: Almost feels out of focus. Gives me a headache just looking at it.
(Quell draws his service weapon.)
DOCTOR: Oh no, no, no, no. That didn't work before.
QUELL: What kind of soldier would I be, dying with bullets in my gun?
(Quell shoots a flask.)
PERKINS: Fifty seconds.
QUELL: Someone shut that man up! For the record, it didn't even flinch.
DOCTOR: Where is it now?
QUELL: Approximately twenty feet in front of me and closing.
PERKINS: Forty seconds.
DOCTOR: Am I close?
(We are treated to the view of the mummy's outstretched fingers coming out of the Doctor's eyes before the rest of its bandaged hand passes through his head.)
QUELL: It's passing right through you, like a ghost.
(Perkins is holding out a scanner and reading his tablet.)
PERKINS: It's not a hologram.
DOCTOR: If you move, will it follow?
QUELL: Do you want me to move? Because I can certainly do that.
DOCTOR: Keep looking at it, but back off quick as you like.
QUELL: It's teleported away. It's behind me.
PERKINS: Twenty seconds.
QUELL: I think this is it. Still, suppose it's not a bad way to go. Blood pumping, enemy at the gates and all that. And thank you, Doctor, for waking me up. It's reaching for me. Hands on my head.
PERKINS: Zero.
QUELL: Ah!
DOCTOR: Teleporter. That means tech. Then sixty six seconds to do what? Sixty six seconds. That seems very, very specific. Too specific for organic. So, what, more tech? What? More? A countdown clock? Something charging?
PERKINS: A man just died in front of us. Can we not just have a moment?
DOCTOR: No. No, no, no. We can't do that. We can't mourn. People with guns to their heads, they cannot mourn. We do not have time to mourn. Everybody, what takes sixty six seconds to charge up or to change state? Anyone? Am I surrounded by idiots? If only I could see this thing.
PERKINS: Don't even joke about that.
DOCTOR: I'm not joking about it. One minute with me and this thing, it would be over!
PERKINS: You know, Doctor, I can't tell if you're a genius or just incredibly arrogant.
DOCTOR: Well, ah, on a good day, I'm both. Ancient tech. This thing has been around for centuries. How? Tech that keeps it alive. Tech that drains energy from the living. Scanner.
(He takes Perkin's scanner and uses it on Quell's corpse, then throws it back to Perkins.)
DOCTOR: Deep tissue scan. He's been leached of almost all energy on a cellular level. The heart attack is just a, is just a side effect.
PERKINS: Oh, it's not just a mummy, it's a vampire. Metaphorically speaking.
DOCTOR: But why take sixty six seconds to drain us? Why not just pounce?
PERKINS: Phase. Moving energy out of phase. That takes about a minute, doesn't it?
DOCTOR: That's why only the victims can see it. It takes them out of phase so it can drain their energy. You, sir, are a genius! This explains everything! Apart from what it is and how it's doing it. Sorry, I jumped the gun there with the you're a genius, that explains everything remark.
PERKINS: Doctor, I think we know the next victim.
(Perkins hands the Doctor his tablet.)
DOCTOR: Ah, of course. That makes perfect sense.

[Strong room]

(He phones Clara.)
CLARA: (sotto) Look, she's had a bad day. That's all.
DOCTOR [OC]: Clara, it doesn't care.

[Laboratory]

DOCTOR: Her bad day, her bereavement, her little breakdown puts her squarely in its cross hairs. She's next.

[Strong room]

DOCTOR [OC]: Every simulation we've run confirms it.
CLARA: Okay, but, but we're in here and, if we stay in here, that thing can't
DOCTOR [OC]: This thing can teleport.

[Laboratory]

DOCTOR: We need her here. Even the computer agrees.

[Strong room]

CLARA: Okay, so you can save her? Right?

[Laboratory]

DOCTOR: Of course not. Why would you think that? This is another chance

[Strong room]

DOCTOR [OC]: To observe it in action.
CLARA: As it kills her.
DOCTOR [OC]: Of course, as it kills her.

[Laboratory]

DOCTOR: If it happens in there, it'll be a waste

[Strong room]

DOCTOR [OC]: So bring her to us.
CLARA: How? How exactly? She's never going to agree to this.

[Laboratory]

DOCTOR: Well, I don't know. Lie to her. Tell her I can save her. Whatever it takes to get her here.
(Perkins watches closely as the Doctor throws down the phone and walks away.)

[Strong room]

MAISIE: What's he saying?
CLARA: He says. He says he can save you.

[Baggage car]

(The strong room door opens and they walk out.)
MAISIE: I knew he could get us out of there. I told you, he's a good man.
(Clara tries to walk past the door to the corridor, to the Tardis. The air wibbles as it stops her. The strong room door closes with a ting!)
CLARA: Yes. Yes, he is.
MAISIE: And to be honest, I don't know how convinced I am by this trauma sense thing, but if the Doctor says he can help me anyway, I mean, that has to be a good thing, doesn't it, Clara?

[Laboratory]

(Gus opens the door and lets the women in. The Doctor runs to shake Maisie's hand.)
MAISIE: Hello, again. I'm Maisie.
DOCTOR: Good for you.
CLARA: We passed the Tardis on the way here. Thought about getting inside, hiding, pulling the levers and hoping for the best. But we couldn't even get in. There was a forcefield around it.
(The Doctor uses Perkins' scanner on Maisie.)
DOCTOR: It's probably Gus trying to block our escape route.
CLARA: But how does he even know what it is? Cos if he knows what it is, then he knows what you are.
DOCTOR: Well, he has tried to entice me here before. Free tickets, mysterious summons, he even phoned the Tardis number. Do you know how difficult a number
CLARA: You knew. You knew this was no relaxing break. You knew this was dangerous.
DOCTOR: I didn't know. I certainly hoped.
CLARA: Okay, this. You see, this. This is why I'm leaving you. This. Because you lied. You lied to me, again. And now you've made me lie. You've made me your accomplice.
MAISIE: What? Sorry? When did you lie? Clara?
CLARA: Maisie, I am, I am so sorry.
(Maisie points at the mummy as the lights flicker.)
PERKINS: Do we start the clock?
DOCTOR: Not yet.
(The Doctor stands in front of Maisie and flashes the scanner in her face.)
DOCTOR: Focus. Focus. Focus! All of that is your grief, your trauma, your resentment. And now
(He puts the scanner to his own head and zaps himself.)
DOCTOR: It's mine.
(The mummy growls and vanishes.)
MAISIE: It's gone.
DOCTOR: No. No, it's not. Not for me. Cos now it thinks I'm you.
(He throws the scanner onto a table.)
DOCTOR: Start the clock. (to the mummy) Hello.
(It reaches for him.)
DOCTOR: I'm so pleased to finally see you. I'm the Doctor and I will be your victim this evening. Are you my mummy? But you can't hurt me until my time is up. I think. So are there magic words? Is there a way to stop you in your tracks? Oh, you really didn't like your gran, did you? There's something visible under the bandages. By the way, you weren't being paranoid. She really did poison your pony.
MAISIE: Oh!
DOCTOR: Markings like the ones the scroll. Oh, and your father. Sorry.
MAISIE: What
DOCTOR: A tattered piece of cloth attached to a length of wood that you will kill for.
PERKINS: Thirty seconds.
DOCTOR: That doesn't sound like a scroll. That sounds like a flag! And if that sounds like a flag, if this is a flag, that means that you are a soldier, wounded in a forgotten war thousands of years ago. But they've worked on you, haven't they, son? They've filled you full of kit. State of the art phase camouflage, personal teleporter.
PERKINS: Ten seconds.
DOCTOR: And all that tech inside you, it just won't let you die, will it? It won't let the war end. It just won't let you stop until the war is over. We surrender.
PERKINS: Zero.
MAISIE: (gasps) I can see it again.
(The mummy steps back from the Doctor and lowers its arms.)
CLARA: It's okay. I think we all can.
PERKINS: Do I start the clock?
DOCTOR: No.
(The mummy salutes the Doctor.)
DOCTOR: The clock has stopped. You're relieved, soldier.
(The mummy disintegrates into a pile of dust and old bandages.)
PERKINS: Phew. He's not the only one.
(The Doctor picks up a piece of blue tech with wires from the remains.)
CLARA: We were fighting that?
DOCTOR: So was he.
CLARA: Listen, what I said
DOCTOR: Save it. We're not out of the woods yet. Well, Gus, I think we solved your little puzzle. Ancient soldier being driven by malfunctioning tech.
GUS: Thank you so much for your efforts. They are greatly appreciated. Unfortunately, survivors of this exercise are not required.
(The Doctor has sonicked the tech, and now gets another tool from a different table.)
DOCTOR: Ah, well, there's a shocker.
(People clutch their throats, gasping.)
GUS: Air will now be removed from the entire train. We hope you have enjoyed your journey on the Orient Express.
CLARA: I take it you know a way out?
DOCTOR: My enemy's enemy is my friend. Especially when he has a built in teleporter.
(Perkins and Maisie pass out.)
CLARA: Great! So use it!
DOCTOR: A little more work.
CLARA: Doctor!
DOCTOR: Couple of minutes. Max. I'll give you a shout.
(Clara hits the floor with an unlady-like thud. The Orient Express explodes.)

[Pebble beach]

(Clara wakes up wrapped in a blanket and lying on another plaid one. The Doctor is back in his dark blue suit sans tie and is scratching at the little visible sand with a stick, doing his Gallefreyan maths. The sky is pink.)
DOCTOR: Oh hello, again. Sleep well?
CLARA: Weren't we just on a train?
DOCTOR: Oh, that was ages ago.
CLARA: And?
DOCTOR: And what? Oh, and we got off the train. Oh, well, the teleporter worked eventually. Beamed everyone into the Tardis. No casualties, just a bevy of sleeping beauties. I tried hacking Gus from the Tardis, find out who set this all up. He really didn't like that. Set off some fail-safe thing. Blew up the train.
CLARA: Blew up the train?
DOCTOR: Blew up the train. But we got away. Then I dropped everyone off at the nearest civilised planet, which happened to be here.
(View of a city with tall pointed buildings in the background.)
DOCTOR: You seemed happy asleep so I just left you.
CLARA: So you saved everyone.
DOCTOR: No, I just saved you and I let everyone else suffocate. Ha, ha, ha.
CLARA: Hmm.
DOCTOR: Yeah, this is just my cover story.
CLARA: So, when you lied to Maisie, when you made me lie to Maisie
DOCTOR: I couldn't risk Gus finding out my plan and stopping me.
CLARA: So you were pretending to be heartless.
DOCTOR: Would you like to think that about me? Would that make it easier? I didn't know if I could save her. I couldn't save Quell, I couldn't save Moorhouse. There was a good chance that she'd die too. At which point, I would have just moved onto the next, and the next, until I beat it. Sometimes the only choices you have are bad ones. But you still have to choose.

[Tardis]

(Perkins is looking at the workings under the time rotor.)
PERKINS: Er, it's er, quite a vehicle you have here, Doctor. I won't pretend to understand half of it. Having said that, I did notice you've got a couple of drive stacks need replacing.
DOCTOR: Oh, you did, did you?
PERKINS: Yeah. You should get someone in. And a job like that takes forever.
DOCTOR: Really? Well, I suppose, whoever I did get in, it might just be easier to have them stay on board for a while. I don't suppose you'd know of anyone?
PERKINS: No. Sorry, Doctor, but I don't think I do. That job could er, change a man.
DOCTOR: Yes, it does. Frequently.
(They go back up to the main deck where Clara is walking around with her mobile phone in hand, still in her 1920s costume.)
DOCTOR: Well, I won't keep you. Goodbye, Perkins. Good to meet you.
PERKINS: You too, Doctor. And er, good luck.
(They shake. Perkins touches his cap to Clara on his way out.)
CLARA: Do you love it?
DOCTOR: Love what?
CLARA: I know it's scary and difficult, but do you love being the man making the impossible choice?
DOCTOR: Why would I?
CLARA: Because it's what you do, all day, every day.
DOCTOR: It's my life.
CLARA: Doesn't have to be. Is it like
DOCTOR: Like what?
CLARA: An addiction?
DOCTOR: You can't really tell if something's an addiction till you try and give it up.
CLARA: And you never have.
DOCTOR: Let me know how it goes.
(Clara's phone rings. She goes up to the gallery to answer it.)
CLARA: Hey, Danny. How are you?
DANNY [OC]: Fine.

[Danny's flat]

DANNY: So, is it done?

[Tardis]

CLARA: Yep. Mission accomplished. Listen, I can't talk now but I'll see you soon and, er, I love you.
DANNY [OC]: I love you, too.
CLARA: Huh. No accounting for taste.
DANNY [OC]: Okay, see you soon.
DOCTOR: Was that Danny? What did he want?
CLARA: (deep breath, then) He's fine with it.
DOCTOR: Sorry, I
CLARA: Danny. He's fine with the idea of me and you knocking about. It was his idea that we stop but, he's decided he doesn't mind and neither do I. Oh, to hell with the last hurrah. Let's keep going.
DOCTOR: That's a big change of heart.
CLARA: Yeah, they happen.
DOCTOR: Seriously?
CLARA: Look, as long as you get me home safe and on time, everything is great. I am so sorry. I've had a wobble. It's a big wobble, but it's fine. Forget about it. Now, shut up and give me some planets.
DOCTOR: Well, I'm glad that you said that, because you know that one that's made entirely of shrubs. Are you sure about this?
CLARA: Are you? Have you ever been sure?
DOCTOR: No.
CLARA: Then what are you waiting for? Let's go.
(They pull the levers together, and the Tardis flies.)


(Transcriber's note - this is a version with intercutting scenes merged to make them flow more smoothly, like I did when the teenagers were talking on their mobile phones in the Sarah Jane Adventures.)
[Flat]

(A frightened bearded man is making a telephone call.)
ROSCOE: Police, please. Hello? Yes. I know who did it. Who did it all. I figured it out. No. No, I can't speak up. They might hear me.
(Something hisses or sizzles nearby.)
ROSCOE: Oh, no. Oh, no. Listen. Listen. They are everywhere. All around. We've been so blind. Argh!
(In a flash he is pulled downwards and disappears, and the telephone dangles on its cord from the wall.)
OPERATOR [on phone]: Hello? Sir? Are you in a safe place? Are you being held against your will? Sir?
(Our attention is brought to a image of an elongated screaming bearded man forming on the narrow wall paper border running across the middle of the wall.)

[Tardis]

(Clara comes up the stairs to the console room.)
DOCTOR: You could leave all that stuff here, you know. We do have literally acres of room.
CLARA: Oh, no. It's all right. Danny's got a little bit territorial. The idea of me leaving so much as a toothbrush here. But, still, he's all right with us doing this which I admit's a little bit weird, cos you'd think if he had a problem with me leaving stuff in the Tardis, he'd object to me travelling in the Tardis. But he's not, so.
DOCTOR: Sorry. Stopped listening a while ago. Okay. Er, same time you left, same place-ish.
CLARA: Ish? Don't give me an ish.
DOCTOR: These readings are very er, ishy.
CLARA: Er, Doctor?
DOCTOR: Uh huh?
(He goes to join her looking at the Tardis door, which is now about a metre high. The Doctor stoops to open it and look outside.)

[Waste ground]

(The sound of a train travelling along a track nearly. Doctor struggles to squeeze out through the gap. Clara follows him and closes the door. Why didn't they open both doors? There are tracks and a train shed behind them. A sign on the railings says Bristol Sidings 344.)
DOCTOR: Well. Well, I wonder what caused this? I don't think we're bigger, are we?
(He scans Clara.)
CLARA: Bristol? Doctor, we're in Bristol!
DOCTOR: And a hundred and twenty miles from where we should be. Impressive.
CLARA: No. Not impressive. Annoying.
DOCTOR: No. This is impressive.
(He points at Clara.)
DOCTOR: This is annoying. The Tardis never does this. This is huge! Well, not literally huge. Slightly smaller than usual. Which is huge.
CLARA: Yes. I get it. You're excited. When can I go home?
DOCTOR: Your house isn't going anywhere. And neither is mine until I get this figured out. Could you not just let me enjoy this moment of not knowing something? I mean, it happens so rarely. Look, I don't think this is dangerous, but I wouldn't like you to get squished accidentally. Anyway, I need you to help me find out what's caused this.
CLARA: Fine. I'll go take a look around.
(Clara walks away past the train shed whilst the Doctor squeezes back in through the Tardis door.)

[Shopping precinct]

(A older man wearing an ID badge goes up to a younger black man in a yellow luminous waistcoat, standing in front of a wall full of graffiti tags. There are other men there. All have numbers on their shirt collars.)
FENTON: It's your filth, Rigsy, start with your signature.
(Fenton puts a brush into a tin on white paint. A bald man with number 36 on his collar speaks up for the young man.)
AL: Oh, come on, there's no need for this.
(Rigsy, number 52, takes the brush.)
FENTON: There you go.
(Rigsy starts to paint over his tag.)
FENTON: Get on with it. This is community service, not a holiday camp.

[Tardis]

(The Doctor is closely examining a Tardis circuit when there is a jolt and an an alarm sounds.)
DOCTOR: Now, that wasn't me, was it?
(He goes to the door and looks at it.)
DOCTOR: Oh, that can't be good.

[Subway]

(Clara goes down towards an underpass. There is a shrine of pictures and flowers by the steps. The community payback group are near the top of the steps. Convict 55 calls out to her. I'm guessing his name from the cast list.)
STAN: Cheer up, love. Might never happen.
GEORGE: (No. 22, an Indian man) Have some respect. She's grieving.
STAN: Oh, sorry, love. I didn't mean nothing by it.
(Clara walks on, and Rigsy runs after her. The underpass proper is decorated with Banksy-style images of people with their backs to us, men and women including one with a child.)
RIGSY: Sorry about them. They're idiots.
CLARA: That's all right, don't worry. I've heard worse.
RIGSY: I've lost someone, too. My Aunt Karina. Deaf as a post. Didn't really know her that well but she's still gone. Is your one in the mural?
(He strokes the back of a small woman in a yellow jacket.)
CLARA: Oh, no. I haven't actually
RIGSY: I'm sure they'll get round to it at some point. I'm not really with that lot out there. I just have to do this community service thing. I just do graffiti. Not anything, you know, murdery or CLARA: So, er, what's all this about? What's happened to all these people?
RIGSY: You mean you don't know?

[Tardis]

CLARA [OC]: Hey, I think I've found something. People are missing all over the estate.

[Waste ground]

(Clara is reporting in via mobile phone.)
CLARA: Do you think there's a connection?
DOCTOR [OC]: Could be.
CLARA: And where are you?
DOCTOR: [OC]: Exactly where I was.
CLARA: No, you're not. I'm here and I can't see. Oh.
DOCTOR [OC]: Yes. Oh.
(The Tardis is maybe six inches high. Clara laughs.)
CLARA: Oh, my God, that is so adorable. Are you in there?
DOCTOR [OC]: Yes, I am.

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: And, no, it's not adorable. It's very, very serious.
(The Doctor takes a small item from a wooden box.)
CLARA [OC]: So is this more shrink ray stuff? Are you tiny in there?
DOCTOR: No. I'm exactly the same size. It's merely the exterior dimensions that have changed.
(The door is a tiny thing in the middle of a wall. He opens it.)

[Waste ground]

(We can see most of the Doctor's face through the open double doors.)
DOCTOR: Stop laughing. This is serious.
CLARA: Yeah, well, I can't help it, can I, with you and your big old face. How are you going to get out?
DOCTOR: Well, plainly I can't. Something nearby is leeching all the external dimensions.
CLARA: Aliens?
DOCTOR: Possibly. Oh, who am I kidding? Probably. Sensors are down and I can't risk taking off with it in this state. Clara, I need you to pick up the Tardis. Carefully. It should be possible. I've adjusted the relative gravity.
(She does.)

[Tardis]

CLARA [OC]: You mean you've made it lighter.
DOCTOR: Clara, it's always lighter. If the Tardis were to land with its true weight, it would fracture the surface of the Earth.
CLARA [OC]: Yeah, maybe a story for another time. What now?
DOCTOR: I've managed to get a rough fix on the source of the dimensional leeching.

[Waste ground / Tardis]

(The Doctor's fingers poke out of the door.)
DOCTOR: It's roughly north west. That way.
CLARA: Please don't do that. That's just wrong.
(He runs back to the console to get some objects.)
DOCTOR: Now, listen! You're going to need these.
(He hands out the psychic paper.)
CLARA: Oh, wow. This is an honour. Does this mean I'm you now?
DOCTOR: No, it does not, so don't get any ideas.
(And the sonic screwdriver. She puts the Tardis in her shoulder bag. He then hands up the tiny object from the box)
DOCTOR: And listen, stick this in your ear. Can you hear me?
CLARA: Yes. Ow! What just happened?
DOCTOR: Nanotech. I just hacked your optic nerve.
CLARA: What does that mean?
DOCTOR: I see what you see.

[Shopping precinct / Tardis]

(Clara turns around, pointing the screwdriver at a block of flats then a wall with a mural of footprints, hand prints and tyre marks.)
CLARA: Anything?
(The view is on the scanner.)
DOCTOR: Yes, I'm dizzy. But nothing useful.
RIGSY [on scanner]: You never did tell me your name.
DOCTOR: No time to fraternize. Come on, get rid of him.
CLARA: I'm er
(The community payback workers are on a meal break.)
CLARA: I'm the Doctor.
DOCTOR: Don't you dare.
CLARA: Doctor Oswald. But you can call me Clara.
RIGSY: I'm Rigsy. So er, what are you a doctor of?
DOCTOR: Of lies.
CLARA: Well, I'm usually quite vague about that. I think I just picked the title because it makes me sound important.
DOCTOR: Why, Doctor Oswald, you are hilarious. Could we get back to work, do you think?
RIGSY: What are you exactly? You don't smell like police but that's some pretty cool gear you got there. You like a spy, or something?
DOCTOR: Oh, he's a bright one, hang on to him.

[Flat]

RIGSY: He was the last one to go missing.
(Rigsy breaks the Police tape across the front door.)
RIGSY: And when he disappeared all the doors and windows were locked from the inside.
DOCTOR [OC]: Ooh, now you're talking. I love a good locked room mystery.
(On the wall behind behind a bookcase of CDs is an interesting mural of what looks like a cracked sandy surface.)
CLARA: Yeah, doesn't everyone?
RIGSY: What?
CLARA: Huh? Oh, sorry. I'm talking to somebody else. He's listening in. Doctor, Rigsy, Rigsy, the Doctor.

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: Hello, barely sentient local.
RIGSY [on scanner]: Another Doctor?
DOCTOR: How do you sleep at night?

[Flat / Tardis]

DOCTOR: Missing people, tiny Tardis, what's the link?
(Clara scans with the screwdriver.)
RIGSY: I think this is great that someone's finally looking into this. The police weren't doing anything. They never do on this estate. People were thinking that no one was listening. That no one cared. So, yeah. I think it's great what you're doing.
DOCTOR: Clara, look, I think that we can manage on our own from now on.
CLARA: Yeah, well, I think he could still be useful.
DOCTOR: He's a pudding brain. Worse than that, he's a fluorescent pudding brain.
CLARA: Okay, fine. And all those other missing people, I suppose you know where they lived.
RIGSY: He could still be in the room.
CLARA: Sorry, what?
RIGSY: Sorry, nothing. I was just thinking out loud. It's like one of those locked room things you get in books.
(Clara looks at herself in the oval mirror over the mantelpiece.)
RIGSY: It's always something weird, like, he's still in the room or something. Do you want to go and check out another flat?
DOCTOR: Do you know, I think that you were wrong about this lad. I think that he could be very useful. Vital local knowledge.
CLARA [on scanner]: Oh, really?
DOCTOR: Yes. So try not to scare him off.
CLARA [on scanner]: How would I scare him off?
(Clara carries on scanning. Rigsy looks at that mural.)
RIGSY: Maybe he's lost in the desert, or something.
CLARA: Okay, right. Are we missing something here? Missing man, locked room.
(The scanner image zooms in on the mural.)
CLARA: Shrink ray?
RIGSY: Sorry, did you say just say shrink ray?
CLARA: What if he is still in this room like you said, only tiny? You know, like underneath the sofa or something.
DOCTOR: Clara, this is the scaring off that we were talking about.
RIGSY: Okay. So er, my lunch break's nearly up. This this has been er, interesting.
DOCTOR: Clara, local knowledge is leaving. Do something!
CLARA: Rigsy! One sec. Doctor, open the doors.
DOCTOR: I didn't mean that!
CLARA: Look, you want him to stay or not?
DOCTOR: You really do throw your companions in at the deep end, don't you?
(Clara puts the Tardis on a shelf.)
CLARA: Rigsy, come here. Meet the Doctor.
(The Doctor is visible through the Tardis doorway, but standing back from it, so not as way out of proportion as earlier.)
CLARA: So, what do you think? Tiny man idea.
DOCTOR: Yes, it's a lovely thought. Which is why I set the sonic to scan for that as soon as we entered. Pleased to meet you.
CLARA: And you didn't think to tell me?
DOCTOR: Well, of course he might have been squashed under a policeman's shoe by now.
RIGSY: It's bigger. On the inside.
DOCTOR: Do you know, I don't think that statement's ever been truer.
RIGSY: What are you? Like, aliens, or something?
CLARA: No. Well, he is.
(Sizzle! An alarm sounds in the Tardis.)
CLARA: Doctor? Doctor, did you hear that?
DOCTOR: Yes. Whatever it was, it just drained a massive amount of energy from inside the Tardis.
CLARA: What was it?
DOCTOR: I don't know, but that's the least of my problems. Just get us out of here.
(He slams the door shut.)
CLARA: Okay. Go. Rigsy, this is where we run. Stick with me.

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: I mean this is just embarrassing. I'm from the race that built the Tardis. Dimensions are kind of our thing. So why can't I understand this?

[Street]

DOCTOR [OC]: Clara, I need more info. Where else have people disappeared?

[Mr Heath's home / Tardis]

(A policewoman is looking at the psychic paper.)
FORREST: MI5?
CLARA: Yes, this case has got our attention.
FORREST: Well, you've come to the right place, ma'am. First reported disappearance, a Mister Heath. It's not on the estate, but it's exactly the same MO as the rest
DOCTOR: Clara, I think that your shrink ray theory was wrong.
CLARA: My shrink ray theory? I thought you were already scanning for that.
FORREST: It's like they vanished.
CLARA: Doctor? What are you doing?
DOCTOR: It just struck me. Locked room mysteries. Classic solution number one, they're still in the room. Classic solution number two, they're in the walls.
CLARA: What do you mean, they're in the
(Clara pulls a lump hammer from her bag, supplied by the Doctor from his workbench.)
FORREST: Have we done as much as we could? No. Do we have any suspects? No. Off the record, I think the top brass are hoping if they ignore this it'll all just go away.
CLARA: Apparently they're in the walls.
(Rigsy slams the hammer into the plaster work then hands it to Clara. PC Forrest's phone rings.)
FORREST: PC Forrest. Yes, sir. MI5, sir.
(She goes out to continue the conversation.)
RIGSY: So, you and that bloke in a box. You do this sort of stuff a lot?
CLARA: Oh, well, he's usually out of the box. But, yep.

[Mr Heath's front room]

FORREST: I don't know. Maybe they thought we weren't doing enough, sir.
(The wall wibbles behind her. She turns.)
FORREST: Can I call you back?
(She uses her torch on the 60s decor.)

[Mr Heath's home]

RIGSY: So how'd you get this gig? You study science, or aliens, or something?
CLARA: (laughs) No. Well, it's kind of a more of a right place, right time or wrong place, wrong time depending on how he's behaving.
DOCTOR [OC]: I can hear you, you know.

[Mr Heath's front room / Tardis]

(The carpet wibbles towards Forrest's feet.)
FORREST: Ma'am, there's something in here, I think.
(She screams as her leg is pulled into the carpet. Rigsy and Clara get there just after she disappears.)
CLARA: PC Forrest? Hello? Hello?
(The torch is lying on the carpet and there is a new mural on the wall behind the sofa. A design of almost completely bilaterally symmetrical red lines.)
CLARA: Doctor, she's gone.
DOCTOR: What am I missing? The Tardis should be able to detect anything in the known universe. The known universe. This universe.
(The scanner shows what Clara can see looking around the room.)
DOCTOR: Clara, wait, go back. Back, back, back. That mural. That is a nervous system scaled up and flattened. I think we've found PC Forrest. What's left of her, at least.
CLARA: Her nervous system.
(The Doctor calls up previous images on the scanner.)
DOCTOR: The mural in the flat. That wasn't a desert at all. It's a microscopic blow up of human skin.
CLARA: What? Why?
DOCTOR: Whatever they are, they are experimenting. They're testing. They are, they are dissecting. Trying to understand us. Trying to understand three dimensions.
(There is the sizzling or hissing sound, then the door slams shut. Rigsy reaches for the handle, but cannot take hold of it.)
RIGSY: Ow. The handle.
CLARA: Doctor. The handle, they've flattened the handle.
DOCTOR: Fascinating. Clara, they're in the walls! Keep away from them. If they touch you, you're finished.
(The sofa and cushions lose their third dimension.)
RIGSY: What happens if they touch us?
(Then an comfy chair goes.)
CLARA: I really don't want to find out.
(They climb onto a handy hanging seat.)
RIGSY: They can't jump, can they?
(Clara's mobile phone rings.)
CLARA: Hey, you.

[Park]

DANNY: I've got our bench. Did you get held up?

[Mr Heath's front room]

CLARA: Just a little. Sorry, Danny. I think lunch is er, a bust.
(The enemy is making the carpet wibble as it moves towards them.)
DANNY [OC]: Oh, hon, you're missing

[Park]

DANNY: Some classic park action.

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: Clara, the window!

[Mr Heath's front room]

(The fireplace then mantelpiece wibble. In fact, the wibble is coming at them from all directions, except down.)
RIGSY: Look! Look! They're climbing the walls.
DANNY [OC]: Who was that?
CLARA: Er, that's just a guy on community support and I'm helping him find his auntie.

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: Nice. Not technically lying.

[Park]

DANNY: Sounds kind of active.

[Mr Heath's front room]

(Clara is swinging the seat on its chain towards the bay window, as the wibble heads across the ceiling.)
CLARA: Er, yeah, there was a thing, er a thing.

[Park]

DANNY: Where are you and are you in trouble?

[Mr Heath's front room]

CLARA: No, no, no, I'm fine!
(Clara sonicks the window and the chain comes away from the ceiling. Crash!)

[Park]

DANNY: Clara?
(Sounds of screams.)
DANNY: Clara?

[Mr Heath's front garden]

(A car alarm is sounding. Rigsy and Clara are safe amongst the shattered windows.)
CLARA: Danny?
DANNY [OC]: What's happening?
CLARA: Oh, not much, just some nonsense. Long story.
DANNY [OC]: What story?
CLARA: Tell you later. Love you!

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: This explains everything. They're from a universe with only two dimensions. And, yes, that is a thing. It's long been theorised, of course, but no one could go there and prove its existence without a heck of a diet.
(See Flatland, by Edwin Abbott Abbott, written 1884 and available at Project Gutenberg.)
DOCTOR: And what long story are you going to tell Danny, huh? Or haven't you made it up yet?
CLARA [OC]: Sorry, what? What was that?

[Subway / Tardis]

DOCTOR: Excellent lying, Doctor Oswald.
CLARA: Yeah? Well, thought it was pretty weak myself.
DOCTOR: I meant to me. You told me that Danny was okay with you being back on board the Tardis.
CLARA: Well, he is.
DOCTOR: Yeah, because he doesn't know anything about it.
CLARA: Doctor
DOCTOR: Congratulations. Lying is a vital survival skill.
CLARA: Well, there you go.
DOCTOR: And a terrible habit.
(Clara gets static in her earbud.)
CLARA: Ah. Doctor, you're breaking up a bit.
DOCTOR]: Yeah, of course I am.
CLARA: No, really, you are. I can't hear you.
DOCTOR: What? Oh, right, blowing out that window's possibly affected the earpiece. Take it out and sonic it.
CLARA: Doing it.
(Rigsy goes around the corner to see his work group painting over the mural.)
RIGSY: Hey! They can't do that. Hey! What you doing?
FENTON: Our job. You're on report, by the way. Late back from lunch.
CLARA: Does it even still count as lying if you're doing for someone's own good? Well, like, technically their own good.
RIGSY: It's a memorial!
FENTON [on scanner]: Council didn't approve it, it's graffiti. Stan.
(Rigsy grabs the paint brush.)
DOCTOR: Look, Clara. Talk to me, talk to me!
RIGSY: What are you doing?
(The Doctor's fingers stick out of Clara's bag and jog her elbow.)
DOCTOR: Clara, the mural. Clara, it's the mural! Over there, look, the mural! We've found the missing people, they're in the walls!
(Clara puts her ear bud back in.)
CLARA: What do I do?
DOCTOR: Act normal, but get everyone out.
CLARA: They're very realistic. Who painted them?
RIGSY: I don't know. A local artist. Probably a grieving relative.
CLARA: Did you ever meet them? Or did they just appear after people disappeared?
FENTON: And who are you when you're at home, love?
(Clara brandishes the psychic paper.)
CLARA: Health and safety. This subway is unsafe. Everyone needs to leave right now.
FENTON: This is blank. Try again, sweetheart.
CLARA: What?
DOCTOR: What? It takes quite a lack of imagination to beat psychic paper.
FENTON: Stan. Do your job.
DOCTOR: Clara, stop him.
(Stan's brush touches the wall and he is sucked in with a cry.)
RIGSY: Stan!
(The images on the wall turn around to face them.)
AL: What is this? What are they?
DOCTOR: They're wearing the dead like camouflage.
CLARA: Forget Stan. Your friend's gone.
DOCTOR: Clara, get them out of there!
CLARA: We need to move. Now.
(They run as the paintings slide off the wall and move across the tarmac.)

[Train shed / Tardis]

(The team run into the nearby train shed across the tracks from the waste ground, and close the corrugated iron door. Clara uses the sonic screwdriver to scan the inside of the building.) GEORGE: Did they follow us? Cos I didn't see them follow us. Are we safe?
AL: Are we really hiding from killer graffiti? This is insane.
DOCTOR: I agree. We'll have to think of a better name for them than that.
GEORGE: And Stan was one of them. Flattened, dead, but coming after us.
DOCTOR: Clara, this is a vital stage. This little group is currently confused and disorientated, but pretty soon a leader is going to emerge. You need to make sure that leader is you.
CLARA: I'm on it. George. George, isn't it? Can you watch that area? If you hear anything, anything moves, you shout, okay?
FENTON: He will do no such thing until I get some answers. Who are you? That's what I want to know. Impersonating a government official. Trespassing on council property.
CLARA: Seriously?
FENTON: Seriously.
CLARA: Fine, I'll tell you who I am. I am the one chance you've got of staying alive. That's who I am.
DOCTOR: Well done.
(The work group go to Clara.)
CLARA: Rigsy, how well do you know this area? Do you know where that door leads?
RIGSY: It's the old Brunswick line. But it's not safe.
AL: Well, there's safe and there's safe.
RIGSY: Yeah, I know it. I used to go down there all the time.
FENTON: Yeah, I'll bet you did. Painting your filth.
CLARA: Yeah, well, you might be glad he did. Those things come in here, that is our only way out. (sotto) I just hope I can keep them all alive.
DOCTOR: Ah, welcome to my world. So what's next, Doctor Clara?
CLARA: Lie to them.
DOCTOR: What?
CLARA: Lie to them. Give them hope. Tell them they're all going to be fine. Isn't that what you would do?
DOCTOR: In a manner of speaking. It's true that people with hope tend to run faster, whereas people who think they're doomed
CLARA: Dawdle. End up dead.
DOCTOR: So that's what I sound like.
FENTON: Who's she talking to?
AL: He says it's MI5.
DOCTOR: Right, here's something that might help you. Do you remember the graffiti from the estate? Footprints, tyre treads?
CLARA: Vaguely.
DOCTOR: Well, I don't think it was graffiti. I think that that is how those creatures saw us. The impressions we make in two dimensional space. That was them reaching out, attempting to talk. At which point they moved into flattening and dissection. Trying to understand. Trying to emulate. But here's the big question. Do they know they're hurting us?
CLARA: So what? You think this is all one big misunderstanding?
DOCTOR: That's a very good question. Why don't we ask them?
(So while George keeps watch, Rigsy gets a step ladder for Clara to go up to sonick the tannoy speakers.)
DOCTOR: We need to find a way to communicate.
CLARA: Why can't the Tardis just translate?
DOCTOR: Because their idea of language is just as bizarre as their idea of space. Even the Tardis is confused.
FENTON: This is a bad idea. What makes this colleague of yours think those monsters even want to talk?
DOCTOR: I know a race
(The Doctor is searching the Tardis for something.)
DOCTOR: Made of sentient gas who throw fireballs as a friendly wave. I know another race with sixty four stomachs who talk to each other by disembowelling.
CLARA: He's got a hunch.
DOCTOR: My point being that in a universe as immense and bizarre as this one, you cannot be too quick to judge. Perhaps these creatures don't even understand that we need three dimensions to live in.
(He reaches underneath the console.)
DOCTOR: They may not even know that they're hurting us.
CLARA: Do you really believe that?
DOCTOR: No. I really hope that. It would make a nice change, wouldn't it? Okay. Let's start with pi. Even in a flat world they would have circles. I don't mean edible pie, I mean circular pi. Which I realise would also mean edible pie but anyway.
(He types on the console, then the screwdriver flickers and sounds come out of the speakers.)
DOCTOR: They're responding. The Tardis is translating now. It's a number. Fifty five.
CLARA: Fifty five? What does that mean?
DOCTOR: Tenth Fibonacci number. Atomic number of caesium.
RIGSY: I know what it means. We all have numbers on our jackets. Have to sign them out. That was the number on Stan's jacket, the man they flattened in the subway.
FENTON: They're gloating.
DOCTOR: We don't know that.
CLARA: It could be an apology, for all we know?
AL: Really? That's nice of them.
FENTON: An apology? Are you seriously
(More sounds.)
CLARA: Shush, shush, shush. Listen. Wait.
DOCTOR: Two two. Twenty two.
CLARA: Twenty two.
RIGSY: That's George.
FENTON: Looks like your number's up, George. Now they're threatening.
CLARA: Maybe. Or maybe they're showing us they can read.
FENTON: Oh, grow up. They're picking targets.
RIGSY: Of course you'd see it that way.
FENTON: What do you mean by that?
CLARA: George?
(George is standing very still.)
RIGSY: Everyone's out to get you, aren't they?
FENTON: In this case, they kind of are.
DOCTOR: Clara, be careful.
(Clara steps to one side whilst looking at George, and sees that he is just a two dimensional image. Then that dissolves into the wall and floor.)
CLARA: The tunnel! Doctor, they've got George.
DOCTOR: I know. I did see.
CLARA: What now?
DOCTOR: Give me a minute. I'm working on it.
(The Doctor is at his workbench, building a gizmo.)

[Disused tunnel / Tardis]

(At a steel door with a wheel in the middle. You know this tunnel is disused because the railway tracks have been removed.)
CLARA: Another flat handle. They were here. Not now. They've stopped chasing us, I think. It feels like they're cornering us.
DOCTOR: You can't apply human logic. You're dealing with creatures from another dimension.
AL: That's three exits all blocked by those creatures.
CLARA: Rigsy, where's the next exit?
RIGSY: The only other one I can think of is where the old line joins the new, but it's a fair walk. Getting through that door would be quicker.
FENTON: But we can't, can we?
RIGSY: I'm just saying.
DOCTOR: Clara, I might be able to help with that door. Give me five minutes.
(The hand sized gizmo is taking shape.)
(Further on, they come across a painting of something exploding out in a circle.)
RIGSY: It's one of mine. Do you like it?
CLARA: Yeah, not bad. So this thing you're working on?
DOCTOR: I think I've figured out a way to restore three dimensions. At least on a small scale, say door handles.
CLARA: So, what's that, then? A de-flattener?
DOCTOR: We're not calling it a de-flattener.
(The Doctor hands it out of her bag. Basically a very old calculator with a ball on top and an extra aerial.)
DOCTOR: This should be able to restore dimensions. You see what I've called it?
CLARA: Two D is. Two Dee Iz?
DOCTOR: No. Twodis. It's called the Twodis. (sigh) Why'd I even bother? Well, give it a go, then.
(Clara aims it at the flat wheel on the steel door. Green rays pulse out of the ball like smoke rings, then there is real smoke and a small bang.)
CLARA: Long way round it is.
(An alarm sounds in the Tardis.)
DOCTOR: Clara, I don't know how, but they're doing it again. They're leeching the Tardis!
CLARA: How? Your doors are closed.
DOCTOR: They've changed frequency. This time it's different.
CLARA: Listen! The Doctor thinks we might be in trouble. He thinks they might be close.
FENTON: Where, exactly?
CLARA: I don't know. He's not sure. He's getting readings all around.
(Something forms a shadow in the light coming down the tunnel.)
FENTON: Oh, that's just great. Sounds important but means absolutely nothing. Can you tell your friend
(A giant hand rushes down the tunnel and grabs Al, lifting him up into the air and taking him back from whence it came. Naturally, he screams.)
AL: Aaaargh! Aaaaaaaaargh!
DOCTOR: Of course. The next stage. 3D.
(Lumps appear in the tunnel floor, which then try to resolve themselves into PC Forrest and others as they rise up.)
RIGSY: Run!
CLARA: Doctor? The door. The handle's flattened.
(The Twodis is handed out of Clara's bag again.)
DOCTOR: I've boosted the output.
CLARA: And it will work this time?
DOCTOR: Absolutely.
(This time there is a steady stream of green smoke rings, and the wheel becomes three dimensional again. Rigsy opens it, they go through and lock it.)
DOCTOR: Clara, stop. Use it again. It can reverse the process.
RIGSY: There's a ladder at the end of this. If we get down into the tunnel, we can make it into daylight.
CLARA: Hang on! Hang on.
(Clara Twodises the wheel into two dimensions again.)
FENTON: If it's flat, we're safe now, aren't we?
RIGSY: They can't get through, can they?
CLARA: Wait.
(On the other side, the indistinct, wobbly people aim red energy at the flat wheel, and it becomes 3D again. They run.)
DOCTOR: They have a new ability. Of course they have. Now they're 3D, they can restore dimensions.

[Tunnel / Tardis]

(As wobbly Stan and PC Forrest lead the rest of the figures through the door, Clara leads the men in a run for their lives. These creatures are difficult to describe. Sort of made up of squares of the surface of people, which aren't stuck together and shift around a little as they move.)
DOCTOR: Clara, do you want the good news or the bad news?
CLARA: We're in the bad news! I'm living the bad news!
DOCTOR: The good news is I've come up with a theoretical way to send them back to their own dimension.
CLARA: Do it! Now!
DOCTOR: And that's the bad news. The Tardis doesn't have enough dimensional energy to pull it off.
CLARA: Great. What do you want me to do about it?
DOCTOR: Apparently these things can pump it out as fast as they can steal it.
CLARA: Maybe if I ask them really nicely, they'll fill you up again. Hey!
(Fenton reaches into Clara's bag, pulling the Tardis out.)
FENTON: Give me that machine! Hand it over!
(As Rigsy and Fenton struggle for the Twodis, the Tardis goes flying over a railing and down a ventilation shaft.)
CLARA: Doctor?
(It lands with a thump, and alarms sound.)
CLARA: Hello? Doctor? Look, can we please deal with this later? Because we need to move.
(The Tardis has completely lost power.)
CLARA: Doctor? Doctor, I dropped you down a hole. Where are you?
DOCTOR: I don't know. My shields have gone. Structural integrity is failing. Another blow like that and I've had it.
(He looks out of the tiny doors.)
DOCTOR: Er, I'm on the train lines. And there's a train coming. Of course there is. Short-term re-materialisation? Not enough power. Teleport? Not enough power. Re-route the heart of the Tardis through - not enough power! Not enough power!
(Train A113 is hurtling along the tracks, sounding its horn. The Tardis has, of course, landed on a crossing point, where the track which is sunk into concrete slabs, so there isn't the usual clearance for the train to just run over something so small.)
CLARA: Can't you move the Tardis?
DOCTOR: Clara, there is no power. The Tardis couldn't boil an egg at the moment. Listen, do what you can to get those people out of there. You're stronger than you know.
RIGSY: I wonder what they're like with ladders?
CLARA: No, I mean you move the Tardis. Like Addams Family.
(As the train bears down on him, the Doctor sticks his hand through the doors and turns the Tardis upright, then uses his fingers to walk along the concrete, over the recessed track and then slightly up a slope. He pulls his hand in and closes the door in order to celebrate with the Addams family theme tune.)
DOCTOR: Ha! Di di di.
(The vibration caused by the train coming down the tunnel knocks the Tardis over so that it is leaning towards the rail as the train bears down. The Doctor looks out, then dives underneath the console, reaches up and pulls something. Clara gets static in her earbud.)
CLARA: Doctor? Doctor?

[Track]

(Rigsy and Fenton have climbed down the ladder to the track.)
RIGSY: They'd be here if they were coming. Where are they?
FENTON: There's no other way down, right? Hey! I'm talking to you.
RIGSY: There is. An old service elevator near the mouth of the tunnel.
(Clara comes down the ladder.)
CLARA: We should go.
FENTON: Oh, no.
(Jerky shadows play against the light at the end of the tunnel.)
FENTON: And there's another train coming.
(The horn sounds behind them. This time it is 2M65, Not In Service, barrelling along towards them. Clara quickly sonicks the signals from green to red, and the driver puts on the brakes.)

[Tardis]

(The Doctor has his coat collar turned up, and is rubbing his hands to try and stay warm.)
DOCTOR: I don't know if you can still hear me out there, but the Tardis is now in siege mode. No way in, no way out. I managed to turn it on just before the train hit. But there's not enough power left now to turn it off.

[Track]

(The driver climbs down from his cab.)
BILL: What's going on? Why the red light?
CLARA: MI5. We've got a, er
FENTON: Blockage. In the tunnel.
(Rigsy runs back along the train.)
CLARA: Can we ram the blockage? The train's empty, isn't it?
BILL: Yeah, it's out of service, but you'd need someone to hold the dead man's handle. Won't run without it. Is this official? Because I've always wanted to ram something.
CLARA: Can we rig it to drive without that? Send it in with no driver?
(The train starts to move forward. Clara runs to board it.)
CLARA: Rigsy!

[Driver's cab]

CLARA: Er, what are you doing?
RIGSY: I'm going to ram them, buy you some time.
CLARA: You'll die.
RIGSY: Yeah, course I'll die. Now go!
CLARA: Well, why'd you want to do that?
RIGSY: Just go, okay? Let me do this.
CLARA: Okay, fine, yeah. And I'll always remember you.
RIGSY: Fine. Great
CLARA: Cos I was just going to do this.
(She takes a piece of stretchy cord and loops it around the handle and something lower down.)
CLARA: No driver required. And I really like that hair band, but I suppose I'll just take it, will I? And every time I look at it, I'll remember the hero who died to save it. Come on. You're not getting off that lightly. There's work that needs doing.
(Anquished Rigsy makes up his mind and they run back down the train, jumping off just before it becomes a mural on the side of the tunnel.)

[Track]

CLARA: I quite liked that hair band.
(Figures start rising out of the tunnel floor again. As they start to run back, Clara spots a small box with circular Gallifreyan symbols on each side lying by the rails. She picks it up.)
RIGSY: What is it?
CLARA: I think it's the Tardis.
(They run.)

[Office]

(Clara is staring at the cube and tapping her earbud, whilst the train driver is brought up to speed with the plot. This office hasn't been used in a long time. There is a typewriter on a desk, old filing cabinets and a long table.)
BILL: They wear your skin?
FENTON: I never thought I'd say this
BILL: This is insane.
FENTON: But I think preferred them when they were flat.
BILL: What do you mean flat?
CLARA: Doctor?
(Nothing.)
CLARA: Doctor? What would you do now? No. What will I do now? Okay, okay, okay. Okay, the last thing the Doctor said was that the Tardis needed energy. He said if it gets energy, he can beat them.

[Tardis]

(The scanner is still sort of working.)
DOCTOR: No, no, no. What are you doing?

[Office]

(Clara is having an idea. She unrolls an old advertising poster for Bristol LMR out on the table and turns it over, blank side up. She uses the Tardis as a paperweight and shakes a handy paint spray can.)
FENTON: Leave her. She's lost it.
RIGSY: Are you okay?
CLARA: Yeah, are you?
RIGSY: I think I will be. What's this?
CLARA: Come on, Graffiti Boy, I've got a commission for you.
(She throws him the spray can.)
RIGSY: I'm flattered but I don't think this is exactly the time
CLARA: Well, fine, if you don't think you're up to it.
RIGSY: What do you need, exactly?

[Service tunnel]

(The Tardis is placed on a metal ledge, and the trio wait the other side of a two dimensional locked door.)
FENTON: You're going to get us killed. This plan's insane.
CLARA: You want to walk? Walk. You want to stay? Then shush!
BILL: They're coming!
(The strange facsimiles of people stagger along the track to the door.)

[Tardis]

(Time is running out for the Doctor.)
DOCTOR: Life support failing. I don't know if you'll ever hear this, Clara. I don't even know if you're still alive out there.
(The wobbly people aim their red energy at the flat wheel on the steel door.)
DOCTOR: But you were good! And you made a mighty fine Doctor.

[Service tunnel]

(More and more energy is poured in, and still the wheel stays flat. On the other side of the wall -)
FENTON: It's not working. You've killed us all.
BILL: This is going to save us? Pumping energy into the wall?
CLARA: No. Not into the wall. Through the wall. Rule number one of being the Doctor. Use your enemy's power against them.
(The door is directly on the other side of the wall from where the Tardis was placed, and the red energy is streaming into it.)
CLARA: They can't restore three dimensions to a door that never existed.
(The poster starts to peel off the wall. The Tardis shakes and power is restored inside. The Doctor runs to the console and starts using controls. Finally, the cube flies off the ledge, changes shape and flies through the air with its familiar sound, growing bigger and bigger until it lands full sized with a thump by the 3D facsimile people. It puts out a forcefield that pushes them away down the track.)
CLARA: It worked. They charged the Tardis.

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: I tried to talk. I want you to remember that. I tried to reach out, I tried to understand you, but I think that you understand us perfectly.

[Train shed]

(The Doctor's words come over the tannoy system.)
DOCTOR [OC]: And I think you just don't care. And I don't know whether you are here to invade, infiltrate or just replace us.

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: I don't suppose it really matters now. You are monsters. That is the role you seem determined to play. So it seems I must play mine.

[Track]

(The Doctor steps out of the Tardis. Clara, Rigsy and Fenton come down the ladder.)
DOCTOR: The man that stops the monsters. I'm sending you back to your own dimension. Who knows? Some of you may even survive the trip. And, if you do, remember this. You are not welcome here. This plane is protected. I am the Doctor.
(He turns, and Clara throws him the sonic screwdriver.)
DOCTOR: And I name you The Boneless.
(He zaps the forcefield, and pulses of energy make the Boneless disintegrate with a squeal.)

[Waste ground]

(The Tardis materialises. The Doctor, Clara, train driver Bill and Fenton get out, followed by Rigsy who closes the door. Bill gets down on his knees and kisses the ground. Clara chuckles. Rigsy makes a phone call on Clara's phone.)
RIGSY: Hi, Mum. It's me.
CLARA: You all right?
BILL: I'm alive, and I've been inside that. I think I'm up on the deal. Come here.
(Bill and Clara hug. Rigsy is walking away whilst speaking to his mum and Fenton is retying his boot laces.)
BILL: Thank you. (to Fenton) You look chipper.
(Bill walks away.)
CLARA: Do people still say chipper?
DOCTOR: Apparently. Are you okay?
CLARA: I'm alive.
DOCTOR: And a lot of people died.
FENTON: It's like a forest fire, though, isn't it? The objective is to save the great trees, not the brushwood. Am I right?
DOCTOR: It wasn't a fire, those weren't trees, those were people.
FENTON: They were Community Payback scumbags, I wouldn't lose any sleep.
DOCTOR: I bet you wouldn't.
FENTON: It's good to be alive though. Thank you. Seriously, thank you.
(And he walks off, too.)
DOCTOR: Yes, a lot of people died and maybe the wrong people survived.
CLARA: Yeah, but we saved the world, right?
DOCTOR: We did. You did.
CLARA: Okay, so, on balance
DOCTOR: Balance?
CLARA: Yeah, that's how you think, isn't it?
DOCTOR: Largely so other people don't have to.
CLARA: Yeah, well, I was you today. I was the Doctor. And, apparently, I was quite good at it.
DOCTOR: You heard that, did you?
CLARA: Yeah, but the power was going off so I suppose you were delirious. You didn't know what you were saying.
DOCTOR: Yes.
(Rigsy has finished his call with a 'love you' and returns to the Doctor and Clara.)
DOCTOR: Ah! The return of the fluorescent pudding brain.
CLARA: You do realise he can hear you now?
DOCTOR: I know. Your last painting was so good it saved the world. I can't wait to see what you do next.
RIGSY: (chuckles) It's not going to be easy. I've got a hair band to live up to. Thanks.
 (He holds out his hand to Clara, and she pulls him in for a hug.)
CLARA: Come here.
(Rigsy leaves.)
CLARA: Admit it. I did well.
(Her phone rings. It is Danny. She picks the I'm in a meeting text option to end it.)
DOCTOR: Is that PE?
CLARA: Just say it. Why can't you just say it? Why can't you just say I did good?
DOCTOR: Talk to soldier boy.
CLARA: It's not him. Come on, why can't you say it? I was the Doctor and I was good.
DOCTOR: You were an exceptional Doctor, Clara.
CLARA: Thank you.
DOCTOR: Goodness had nothing to do with it.
(Mae West, 'Night After Night' 1932.)

[Room]

(Our mysterious Edwardian lady is apparently monitoring all this on her tablet computer. She is looking at a live feed of Clara's face on it.)
MISSY: Clara. My Clara. I have chosen well.
(She laughs.)


[Forest]

(A schoolgirl runs through the dappled light of a forest until she finds an incongruous blue Police Box. She knocks on the door and it is opened by a tall man who has to look down to see her.)
MAEBH: I'm lost. Please, can you help me?
DOCTOR: It's that way.
(He shuts the door then opens it again and stares at the forest.)
DOCTOR: Are those trees?
MAEBH: I need the Doctor. Are you the Doctor?
DOCTOR: Yes. Do you have an appointment? You need an appointment to see the Doctor.
MAEBH: Please. Something's chasing me.

[Tardis]

(He lets her inside and she gasps. The Doctor does the explanation with hand gestures.)
DOCTOR: When you drink a glass of Coke, it's only this big, but it's actually got this much sugar in it. It works a bit like that.
MAEBH: What does?
DOCTOR: The Tardis. It's bigger on the inside than the outside, or did you not notice?
(She follows him up to the gallery, where he picks up and unfolds a street map of London.)
MAEBH: I just thought it was supposed to be bigger on the inside, so I didn't say anything.
DOCTOR: Well, of course it's supposed to be bigger. Most people are confused by that.
MAEBH: I find everything confusing, nearly. So, I don't say anything. That's how come I'm in the woods. I thought Miss Oswald told me to find the Doctor. But it wasn't her.
It was just in my head.
DOCTOR: Miss Oswald? Dark hair? Highly unpredictable? Surprisingly round face?
MAEBH: Everyone says she's in love with Mister Pink.
DOCTOR: The PE teacher.
MAEBH: Maths. I really like him. I was in his group.
DOCTOR: Mister Pink was looking after you? Well, that explains why you're lost.
(He discards the map and they go back down to the console.)
DOCTOR: It doesn't surprise you that I know all about your school?
MAEBH: Everyone seems to know everything about everything, apart from me.
DOCTOR: That's not quite true. I, for instance, have no idea why,  when the terrestrial navigation
(Maebh is about to touch a control, so he thumps the console.)
DOCTOR: The terrestrial navigation starts up, it closes down all the other systems.
MAEBH: You should ask somebody who knows.
DOCTOR: Hmm. That's another of the drawbacks of being the last of your species. No one to ask when your Tardis won't start.
(He sets the time rotor going. It stops after a few seconds. The terrestrial navigation lady speaks.)
TER-NAV: You have reached your destination.
DOCTOR: No, we haven't. We're supposed to be in the middle of London.
TER-NAV: You have reached your destination.
DOCTOR: Oh, stop saying that!
MAEBH: She's only saying it because it's true. We are in the middle of London.
DOCTOR: We are in the middle of a forest.
MAEBH: Come and see.
(She takes his hand and leads him outside.)

[Trafalgar Square]

MAEBH: Nelson's Column. Do you like it?
DOCTOR: Do I. Sorry, what?
MAEBH: Do you like the forest being in Trafalgar Square? I think it's lovely.
(They look up, past one of Landseer's bronze lions to a tall Corinthian column with ivy growing up it, which is topped by a 5 1/2 metre sandstone statue of a famous one-armed Admiral of the Royal Navy, gazing southwards over a lush green forest amongst the buildings of central London.)

[London Zoological Museum]

(A display of stuffed wolves look down on the children in their sleeping bags. A bright light shines across them then homes in on a dark-skinned boy, who wakes up.)
SAMSON: Bradley! Sir! Tell him, sir! He's blinding me.
DANNY: Give me that, Bradley.
BRADLEY: I'm allowed a torch, sir. I've got a note. I'm darkness phobic.
SAMSON: Just because he's scared of the dark, sir, is he allowed to blind me?
DANNY: You're allowed a torch, Bradley, not a pocket supernova. Okay, listen up. A few things to run through before we head home. Put your phone away, Bradley. Thank you.
First, collect any rubbish you may have generated through midnight feasts or whatever
(A little later, dressed in  their school uniforms, the children follow their teachers into the main foyer where a stuffed tiger is on display.)
DANNY: Hello? Hello?
(One chubby girl with pigtails stops at a display of a section cut through a large tree trunk.)
RUBY: Look at this. Why is this one so fat, miss?
CLARA: Because it was alive so long.
RUBY: This ring, though. All the other rings are thin, but this one's fat and red, see?
CLARA: Must have been a good year to be a tree.
(The elderly night watchman turns up.)
GEORGE: I should have been relieved, you know.
DANNY: Oh, Coal Hill School. Sleepover.
GEORGE: Shush, shush!
(He takes the bar off the main entrance then enters numbers on a code pad very slowly and carefully. The boys sigh. It unlocks, but refuses to open.)
GEORGE: Hang on. There's a knack to this.
(He returns to the code pad.)
DANNY: No, no, no, no, no. It moved. It moved. It's jammed, it's not locked. Come on, team.
BRADLEY: What team?
(Teachers and pupils all push at the doors until they open.)
SAMSON: Wow! Sir, where are we?
DANNY: What do you mean, where are we?

[Outside the museum]

(A red double decker bus is stranded amongst the trees.)
RUBY: We can't have been asleep for that long, can we?
(Souvenir photographs of the forest are taken on mobile phones. Danny goes up to the roof to survey the terrain. Only the taller buildings and landmarks are visible above the canopy. We are then treated to a view of a very green Earth, then various news reports from around the world.)
JENNY HILL: (BBC on a railway track) Well, you've heard of leaves on the line. This is going to be slightly harder to clear 
ACCRA REPORTER: (In front of an overgrown goal.) In three hours' time, the Ghana Black Stars are due to play Sierra Leone in the African Cup of Nations.
PARIS REPORTER: Est-ce que c'est bien le Bois de Boulogne? Non, c'est le centre-ville.
ACCRA REPORTER: It does not look like the pitch will be ready.
(Clara makes a phone call from a bus stop. The woodpeckers are having a wonderful time in the trees. So where are all the pigeons?)
CLARA: You're always showing me amazing things. Well, I, Doctor, have finally got something amazing to show you.

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: Yes, well, there are some things I've never seen, but that's usually because I've chosen not to see them. Even my incredibly long life is too short for Les Miserables.
CLARA [OC]: Oh, Doctor.

[Bus stop]

CLARA: You're going to love this.
DOCTOR [OC]: Well, when you come to collect this child, you can tell me then.
CLARA: Huh? What child?

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: Young female human. Standard defenceless little girl. Your friend Mister Pink was supposed to be looking after her.

[Bus stop]

CLARA: She probably has a name.

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: Good point. You. Have you got a name at all?
MAEBH:  Maebh. (pronounced May-v, because it is Welsh.) My name's Maebh.

[Bus stop]

CLARA: What? Maebh?

[Tardis]

CLARA [OC]: Where are you?
DOCTOR: Trafalgar

[Bus stop]

DOCTOR [OC]: Square.I found her wandering around the

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: Brand new forest.

[Bus stop]

CLARA: Brand new forest?
DOCTOR [OC]: Yes. It's like the

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: New Forest, except even newer.

[Bus stop]

CLARA: Is that the forest that's covering London?
DOCTOR [OC]: Was that the amazing thing you were going to show me?'

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: It is amazing, but I saw it first.

[Bus stop]

CLARA: Look, is she all right? Will you bring her over?
DOCTOR: No, I can't

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: Bring her over. I'm a Time Lord, not a childminder.
CLARA [OC]: You've got a spaceship.

[Bus stop]

CLARA: All we've got are Oyster cards.
DOCTOR [OC]: And

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: I've got a global rapid afforestation crisis to deal with.

[London Zoological Museum]

(Clara goes back inside.)
DANNY: What did they say?
CLARA: Who?
DANNY: The school. Parents. You were just on the phone.
CLARA: Oh, yeah. Rang school and parents. Yes, of course. Thought that was the priority.
DANNY: And?
CLARA: And I couldn't get through. Left messages. I'll try again.
DANNY: You didn't call the school. You called him.
CLARA: No, he called me, actually. I can't stop him calling me, can I?
DANNY: I thought you weren't in contact.
CLARA: London has just been taken over by a gigantic forest. Who do you want to talk to, Monty Don?
DANNY: I want to do my job, which is looking after these kids.
CLARA: Oh, really? How many kids?
DANNY: What?
CLARA: Where's Maebh Arden?
(Arden as in Forest of Arden? Danny looks around.)
CLARA: She's with the Doctor.
DANNY: What? No, no, no, no, no. Maebh is a vulnerable kid. She's on medication. She's had an emotional trauma. He. Has he even been CRB checked?
CLARA: He didn't abduct her. She was lost. He found her.
BRADLEY: I thought you said they were in love. Why are they shouting at each other?
RUBY: That's what people do when they're in love. Don't you know anything?

[Cromwell Road]

(A tree has grown up through a bicycle, lifting it high into the air. More buses and taxis are stranded.)
SAMSON: Where are we actually going? Where is he taking us?
(They stop by an Underground station sign.)
DANNY: Who wants to be a navigator?
(Lots of hands go up.)
CHILDREN: Me, me, me!
(Danny selects Bradley by handing him something.)
DANNY: Good lad. Let's do this.
BRADLEY: (to Samson) What's an avigator?
DANNY: We'll follow the lamp posts. That will keep us on Cromwell Road. We'll be able to orientate ourselves.
RUBY: I thought we were getting a coach. Where's the coach?
DANNY: Well, Ruby, it seems there are a lot of trees in the way.
RUBY: Why can't we just wait here until they've gone?
DANNY: Because trees don't just disappear, Ruby.
RUBY: They just came. Why wouldn't they just go?
(Outside the Natural History Museum, according to the sign.)
CLARA: The question is, how did they get here? Can a forest grow overnight, or have we been asleep for years, like Sleeping Beauty?
DANNY: No, the question is, how are we going to get these kids home?
CLARA: Oh, absolutely. Yeah. That is the big question.
DANNY: Okay, team. It's crucial we stick together. If you start to fall behind, don't. Bradley, we're going to head north east first to collect Maebh from Trafalgar Square, then we're going south to the river. Come on, keep up!
(Groans.)
RUBY: What's he talking about? Where are we going?
CLARA: You are enjoying this just a little bit too much. Come on. Are you not even a little bit curious about how? Who? Why? When?
DANNY: I am curious. I am bewildered. I am, in fact, enchanted. But I'm not the priority. The kids are.
CLARA: You see, now, that attitude is (sotto) actually very attractive.

MINISTER [on TV} The Government emergency committee, COBRA, has formulated an action plan. We will create pathways through the trees using carefully controlled fires. This will facilitate the movement of essential services.

[Trafalgar Square]

(The Doctor is standing on the lion's plinth scanning the trees while Maebh watches the broadcast on her phone.)
MINISTER [on phone]: We are therefore asking you to stay in your homes. Fill your baths, sinks, and any buckets with fresh water.
DOCTOR: Why would there be no reading? Because they are actually made of wood. No circuits. No mechanism. Wood.
(He jumps down to the ground. The National Gallery is in the background.)
MAEBH: What's this for?
DOCTOR: This is a sonic screwdriver. It interacts with any form of communication you care to mention. Sadly, trees have no moving parts and don't communicate.
MAEBH: They communicate a bit, though.
DOCTOR: What?
MAEBH: Otherwise they wouldn't all grow at the same time, would they.
DOCTOR: So, what, do you think that's how spring begins? With a group message on Tree Facebook? Do you think they send texts to each other?
MAEBH: You don't need a phone to communicate, do you. I haven't phoned home, and I know my mum is worried about me.

[Arden home]

(On the phone.)
MAEBH'S MUM: You said you'd collect Maebh. It's all right, I'm collecting her. Soon as I find my car keys. I can't see a thing. Next door have planted bloody Hydrangeas and they've gone mental! I've had words with her about it before. She's
(Then she opens the front door.)
MAEBH'S MUM: Oh. I'll call you back.

[Brompton Road]

(Passing shop windows.)
RUBY: Miss, in the museum, right, I was reading about reproduction
CLARA: Oh, Ruby, this really isn't the right moment
RUBY: And that said that trees have blossom, and then that turns into fruit or seeds or nuts. Right?
CLARA: Right, Ruby.
RUBY: These trees have got blossom and nuts.
CLARA: Oh, yeah. That is strange.
(They reach Knightsbridge Underground Station.)
SAMSON: Nuts. That's unfortunate for you, isn't it, Bradley? You have an allergy, don't you? What if one of them falls on your head? Do you die, or swell up like a massive melon?
BRADLEY: Shut it!

[Outside the Arden home]

(Their neighbour, a black woman, is also not pleased with the all the extra greenery in their street.)
NEIGHBOUR: I think we should have been consulted. What's it in aid of, even?
MAEBH'S MUM: How far does this go? I need to collect Maebh.

[Trafalgar Square]

(The school outing arrives at the lion.)
DANNY: Trafalgar Square. Well done, Bradley. Excellent navigation skills.
(Clara sees the Tardis.)
CLARA: Ah ha! There it is. All sorted now. Come on.
BRADLEY: Can we take a picture with the lion, sir? Please?
DANNY: Er, stay together, but okay.
(The selfies don't show much of the lion.)
CLARA: I cannot believe Bradley just said please.
DANNY: Really?
CLARA: Yeah. He usually prefers other means of persuasion.

[Memory - English classroom]

BRADLEY: Give it! Give it! Miss! He won't lend me his dictionary.
(Clara doesn't look up from her marking.)
CLARA: You could try saying please, Bradley.
BOY: Ow!
(The crash makes Clara look up from her marking. A desk has been overturned. Bradley is sent out of the classroom.)

[Trafalgar Square]

CLARA: And Ruby

[Memory - Maths classroom]

(Danny draws a right angled triangle then marks the topmost angle with an X.)
DANNY: And how do we find X? Ruby?
RUBY: It's there, sir. At the top.
DANNY: No, how do we find
RUBY: It's not lost. It's there at the top, Look!
DANNY: No, how do we find the value of X?
RUBY: Why are you asking me all the questions? Give someone else a go.

[Trafalgar Square]

CLARA: You bring out the best in them.
(There is a rumble, and Nelson's column sways a little. Ruby slides down from the pedestal holding a piece of broken branch.)
RUBY: Ow! Look, sir. No rings. Trees usually have rings to tell you how old they are. This one's got no rings. Why's that then, sir?
DOCTOR: The rings mark the years of growth. One ring for each year. This grew up overnight. That whole tree is the result of just one night's growth, and they're still growing.
CLARA: Everyone, this is the Doctor, and he's going to sort everything out. Isn't that right, Doctor? It's what he does.
DOCTOR: Well, having looked at things, I think, probably, the answer to that is no.
CLARA: He always says that. He's really clever.
DOCTOR: Oh, yes, I am. Very clever. But what use is clever against trees? They don't listen to reason. You can't plead with them. You can't lie to them. They have no moving parts, no circuits. This is a natural event.
DANNY: How can it be natural for a tree to grow in one night?
DOCTOR: Exactly what they said about the Ice Age. How can whole glaciers just pop up out of nowhere? Well, they just did. That's how this planet grows - a series of catastrophes. Farewell to the Ice Age. Welcome to the Tree Age. Possibly. When the Ice Age was here, you lot managed to cook mammoth. Now there's a forest, you'll just have to eat nuts.
BRADLEY: I can't eat nuts. I've got an allergy.
CLARA: Don't worry. It's a thing he does. He pretends he's not interested and then he has an idea. He's playing for time.
DOCTOR: Time. Interesting.
CLARA: See? Clever kicking in.
DOCTOR: A tree is a time machine. You plant a little acorn in 1795, and in the year 2016, there's an oak tree, there, in the same spot, with a tiny little bit of 1795 still alive inside of it. You can't create an overnight forest with extra special fertiliser. You have to mess with the fabric of time. And communicate with trees.
(He runs into the Tardis, and Clara follows.)

[Tardis]

(Then Danny and the children.)
CLARA: So you're saying it's an act of aggression?
DOCTOR: By trees?
RUBY: Er, trees clean the air.
CLARA: Exactly. Well done, Ruby. Someone or something who's trying to scrub the atmosphere before colonising or invading. Ah, yes, Doctor. Ahem. This is Coal Hill Year Eight Gifted and Talented Group.
SAMSON: What are the round bits for?
DOCTOR: Ask your teacher. Come on! Down from there!  Hey! Away from the console. Come on. That's an antique. Get away from there! Don't touch that!
(The children are playing with the controls.)
DOCTOR: Haven't any of you been struck by the fact that it's, look, it's bigger on the inside?
RUBY: There wasn't a forest. Then there was a forest. Nothing surprises us any more.
DOCTOR: These trees all appeared at once. That wasn't a coincidence. There's no such thing as an arboreal coincidence. Something, someone has coordinated this. To coordinate, you need to communicate. Every communication channel on the Tardis is open, and nothing.
(Danny sees a pile of school exercise books and picks the top ones up. He looks at someone's drawings of an angry sun sending zig zags towards tree tops.)
DOCTOR: Except. Let me see that.
DANNY: Homework books. Why are these here?
(They look at the name on the front.)
DOCTOR: Maebh Arden. Maebh Arden. Which one is Maebh Arden? Which one's Maebh? Maebh? Maebh? Maebh? Maebh? Maebh? Maebh? Maebh? Maebh?
(The Doctor looks at each child in turn whilst saying the name.)
RUBY: Oh, my God. Maebh's gone. Maebh's lost in the forest. Maebh's going to die!
DOCTOR: Argh!
CLARA: Ruby, that's enough! Doctor?
DOCTOR: We've got to find her!
CLARA: Yes, I know that we have to find her. Doctor, listen to me. Her sister went missing last year. She's on medication. The child is barely functioning. She hears voices. She's very vulnerable.
DOCTOR: What do the voices say?
CLARA: I don't know. She takes tablets and they stop.
DOCTOR: You people. You never learn. If a child is speaking, listen to it.
DANNY: Oh, like you listened to her?
(The Doctor turns on the scanner, and it shows a large solar prominence flaring off.)
DOCTOR: He's right. She was trying to tell me something and I ignored her. Maebh Arden is tuned to a different channel. She can lead us to the source, to the heart of the forest. We have to listen to her. We have to find her.
CLARA: Not everything can be fixed with a screwdriver. It's not a magic wand.
DOCTOR: Does she have a phone?
CLARA: Well, yes, she does.
DOCTOR: Have you got the number?
CLARA: Er, yep.
(The Doctor sonicks Clara's phone. )
DOCTOR: Maebh Arden. Five hundred yards south east of here. I'll go get her.
DANNY: I'll go with him.
CLARA: Oh, I can go. You can
DANNY: You haven't seen him for months?
(The Doctor leaves.)
CLARA: Something like that.
DANNY: You didn't even say hello. You just sprung straight into action. Special unit.
RUBY: This is so cool.
(The Doctor rushes back in. The children are taking photographs.)
DOCTOR: Hey! Do not. Touch. Anything. Anything. H-h-okay?
RUBY: Okay.
CLARA: See? Someone needs to go. Child protection.

[Northumberland Avenue]

DOCTOR: Gifted and talented? Really?
(They pass a stranded taxi.)
CLARA: Furious, fearful, tongue-tied. They're all superpowers if you use them properly. Are they going to be all right?
(The nearby traffic lights go out. Presumably the growing tree roots are disrupting the cables.)
DOCTOR: They're in the Tardis, the safest place on the planet.
(Another rumble, and they look up to see Horatio falling towards them. They throw themselves forward and the statue just misses.)
DOCTOR: If this is an invasion
CLARA: What?
DOCTOR: It's over. They're here, they've won. What do they want?

[Trafalgar Square]

(The children come out of the Tardis, coughing in the stone dust.)
RUBY: I'm not just going to stand here and let her die.
DANNY: Who?
RUBY: Miss. You let her go off with some randomer into the forest. You're supposed to be madly in love with her.
DANNY: I'm? Who said that?
RUBY: Everyone.
SAMSON: She's probably dead now anyway. Crushed by Nelson.
RUBY: What if the trees collapse on her, and kill her?
DANNY: You're worrying too much.
RUBY: Yeah, but what if the wild animals come out and eat her?
DANNY: Ruby, you're letting your imagination run away with you.
RUBY: I'm not, though, am I, because I haven't got an imagination. You can ask Miss Oswald.
DANNY: Okay, then. Come on, team, let's do this.
SAMSON: We will, if you stop calling us a team.

[Forest]

(Riding a bicycle along a track.)
MAEBH'S MUM: Maebh!

[Northumberland Avenue]

CLARA: Doctor? Look behind us. The path we just walked down. It's overgrown already.
(The Doctor picks up a pink phone.)
DOCTOR: Clara!
CLARA: Why would she put her phone down?
DOCTOR: Doesn't want to be followed? Lost a hold of it in a struggle? Left it as a clue, so we would know where she was going? Trail of breadcrumbs. Hansel and Gretel.
CLARA: I'm actually frightened. I never get frightened. Why am I frightened?
DOCTOR: You just lost a little girl.
CLARA: Yes, that is a worry, but I know you'll find her. No, no, no. This is not a worry, this is a dread. Maebh!
DOCTOR: You're pursuing a little lost girl through a mysterious forest. The path has disappeared. You find yourself with a strangely compelling masculine figure. Maebh!
CLARA: Any minute now we're going to find a gingerbread cottage with a cannibal witch inside. Maebh!
DOCTOR: Exactly. The forest. It's in all the stories that kept you awake at night. The forest is mankind's nightmare.

[Forest]

(Maebh is running and waving her hands to waft away the invisible midges. She stops to put her bright red school pencil case on the ground then runs on until she sees a group of people in hazmat suits at an Underground station. She runs away, waving her hands in the air again, pausing only to put down her pink lunch box.)
DOCTOR: Clara. Is it hers?
(The pencil case. Note - are those Converse All Star trainers that Clara is wearing, like David Tennant used to?)
CLARA: Yes. Clever girl.
(She strides past a bus stop, pushes aside a branch and is confronted by a hazmat suit worn by one of several men. These must be the Emergency Service Officers on the cast list.)
ESO: Get back! We're burning here. Stay back.
CLARA: We're looking for a little girl.
ESO: Stay back. We're about to burn.
(The flame thrower is set to work on a small tree.)
ESO: Good job!
(But without the flame thrower feeding them, the flames slowly go out.)
ESO: What's going on? Trees aren't responding to flame-thrower. I mean, they don't catch fire. They just don't catch. It's like they're flame proof or something.
(The Doctor and Clara walk on.)
DOCTOR: Trees control the oxygen on this planet. They withhold it, they smother the fire. What sort of forest is clever? What sort of forest has its own in-built fire extinguisher?
CLARA: What do they want?
DOCTOR: Why now?
CLARA: What do you mean, why now?
DOCTOR: The whole natural order is turning against this planet. But why? Why now?
CLARA: Well, what else?
(The Doctor takes Maebh's homework book from his pocket and shows Clara the drawings.)
DOCTOR: How did she know this?
CLARA: What is it?
DOCTOR: This is a massive solar flare headed for Earth, like the one that destroyed the Bank of Karabraxos. I've got an entire Tardis and I didn't notice this. But she knew. How?
CLARA: This is Maebh's. Where did you get this?
DOCTOR: You left your marking in the Tardis.
CLARA: Oh, great, right, well, that's just brilliant, isn't it. You don't think Danny saw this, do you?
DOCTOR: I've just informed you that a solar flare is going to wipe out your planet. You're worried about a row with your boyfriend. How did she know this? She even put the date on it!
CLARA: I always make them date their homework.
DOCTOR: It's today's date.
CLARA: Well, there must be a way?
DOCTOR: They want something. They're saying something. If there is a way, the way is Maebh Arden.
CLARA: Okay, you know they're not really gifted and talented, don't you? I just tell them that to make them feel good.
DOCTOR: She's lost someone. People who've lost someone, they're always listening, always looking, always hoping. So, they notice more. They hear more.
(A wolf howls.)
CLARA: Was that a howl?
(A second animal replies.)
CLARA: Was that a wolf? No. That is impossible. We're in London.
DOCTOR: Would that be the London with the zoo? The zoo with the pack of wolves? The zoo whose barriers and gates have probably been mangled by the trees? No, wolves are not impossible. Stick to the path, Red Riding Hood.
CLARA: There is no path.
(The pack howls.)
DOCTOR: Then we're lunch.
(Maebh is still running and waving her hands. She stops as something growls nearby. A pair of eyes glitter in the foliage behind her. She turns, sees the wolf and screams. The Doctor and Clara hear her.)
CLARA: Maebh?
(Maebh runs. The wolf gives chase. The Doctor and Clara run. Maebh arrives at a wrought iron fence. The pack is behind her. Suddenly, Clara is on the other side of the fence.)
CLARA: Maebh! Doctor, give me a boost so I can pull her over. Maebh? Maebh!
(Maebh runs to the nearby gate and goes through.)
DOCTOR: Maebh. You came looking for me. You didn't
(Maebh starts waving her hands around again, trying to swat away midges.)
DOCTOR: Maebh, Maebh, you didn't just stumble into the Tardis. Tell me what you know.
CLARA: Doctor
DOCTOR: This is important.
CLARA: Yes. Can we please deal with the wolves first?
DOCTOR: These are zoo wolves. They're not even used to hunting.
CLARA: Doctor!
(The three wolves show their teeth.)
DOCTOR: All right, okay. We've just got to look as if we're too much bother to eat, right? So, stay still. Stay together. Look big. Look big like a big three-headed, six-legged scary thing!
(The wolves jump over the fence and run away, whining.)
DOCTOR: Ha ha! Told you they were rubbish. Those wolves are terrified.
CLARA: What are wolves frightened of?
(A deep throaty growl answers the question. It is a large cat with the sort of stripes that make it almost invisible in dense woodland. It walks up to the fence and roars, showing off its magnificent canine teeth.)
DOCTOR: There are very good solid scientific reasons for being really quite frightened just now.
(A bright light is shone in the tiger's face. It doesn't like it, and retreats. It is Danny with Bradley's torch, and the rest of the children are behind him. They all cheer.)
CLARA: Mister Pink! Why, thank you very much.
DANNY: Ah, no problem. Just decided it was best not to leave you alone with him. They've worked well together. Noticeable increase in confidence and energy levels.
(Maebh is waving her arms again, and the Doctor is looking at her curiously.)
CLARA: Well done. And for saving us from a tiger, too.
DANNY: Er, has she had her medication yet?
CLARA: Oh. No, I
DOCTOR: No, no. Not her medication. We don't want to shut her up. We want to know what she knows. Maebh, what's the. Maebh, what is this? What is this?
(The Doctor imitates Maebh's hand waving.)
DANNY: Apart from being almost savaged by a tiger and abducted by a Scotsman, she's allowed any nervous tics she likes, okay?
DOCTOR: This is not a nervous tic. This is react
RUBY: Please! Just give her her tablets. She's been in a state since her sister went missing.
(Maebh runs off.)  
DANNY: Maebh! Maebh! Maebh!
(Danny and the other children go through the gate and run after her.)
RUBY: You won't find your sister out there.

[Clearing]

(Maebh arrives at cobweb festooned small trees surrounding a circular open area, with two deckchairs and a Union Flag in the background. The low sun through the trees is beautiful. They catch up to her.)
RUBY: Miss? What is it, miss?
MAEBH: It's coming. It's coming for everyone, and I can't unthink it.
DOCTOR: Maebh. Maebh, this forest is communicating. With you. Nobody else. No technology can hear what it's saying, but you can. Tell us what it wants. Where it came from. Just tell me who did this.
MAEBH: It was me. I did this. I did these trees.
DOCTOR: No, Maebh. You didn't make a global forest appear overnight. How could you do that?
MAEBH: Thoughts come to me. Ever since Annabel went missing, I look for her everywhere. I don't find her, but I find thoughts. The big forest was one. I thought everyone would love it. The thoughts! The thoughts! They go so fast.
BRADLEY: This is stressing me now. When I get stressed, I forget my anger management.
CLARA: Maebh, can you see something that we can't see?
MAEBH: Nearly. Too fast. Everywhere.
DOCTOR: Everything's subject to gravity. If I can create a little local increase
(The Doctor brandishes his sonic screwdriver.)
DANNY: No. You're not experimenting on
(Golden dancing points of light appear around Maebh's head. These are the invisible midges she was trying to bat away with her hands.)
MAEBH: They're lovely! They don't like it when you're holding them. They want you to let them go.
DOCTOR: Who are they?
MAEBH + HERE: We are Here. Here, always, since the beginning and until the end.
DOCTOR: Here? That's it?
(The Here have a very deep voice that drowns out Maebh's higher pitched one.)
HERE: We are the green shoots that grow between the cracks, the grass that grows over the mass graves. After your wars are over, we will still be Here. We are the life that prevails.
DOCTOR: Why now? Why are you here now?
HERE: We hear the call and we come, as we came before to the great North Forest, where we lie still in a great circle. As we came to the vast Southern Forest.
DOCTOR: Who is calling you now?
HERE: The sun that creates. The sun that destroys. You are hurting us. Let us go.
DOCTOR: You sent for me. The girl came looking for me. Why? Why me?
HERE: We did not send. Pain. Did not send for you. We don't know you. We were here before you and will be here after you.
(The Doctor turns off the screwdriver.)
SAMSON: That was actually quite cool.
(Maebh falls to her knees. Danny and the Doctor go to her.)
DOCTOR: Maebh, you came looking for the Doctor. Think. Who sent you for the Doctor?
MAEBH: It was just a thought. It was just a thought that came. I think it came from Miss.
(Danny looks at Clara.)
MAEBH: They've gone. Why does everything have to go?
(The Doctor walks to the edge of the circle, and Clara goes to him.)
CLARA: This really is going to happen, isn't it?
DOCTOR: Stars implode. Planets grow cold. Catastrophe is the metabolism of the universe. I can fight monsters. I can't fight physics.
CLARA: Why would trees want to kill us? We love trees.
DOCTOR: You've been chopping them down for furniture for centuries. If that's love, no wonder they're calling down fire from the heavens.
CLARA: But we saw the future. Lots of futures. Earth's futures.
DOCTOR: They're about to be erased.
CLARA: If you can't save them all, save who you can. The Tardis. It's a lifeboat, isn't it? Not everybody has to die.
(The big solar flare forms. Meanwhile, Danny leads his team back to Trafalgar Square, singing like American GIs.)
DANNY: Everywhere we go-o-o!
CHILDREN: Everywhere we go-o-o!
DANNY: People wanna kno-o-ow!
CHILDREN:  People wanna kno-o-ow!
DANNY: Who we a-a-re.
CHILDREN:  Who we a-a-re.
DANNY: We are the Coal Hill Gifted and Talented
(Maebh's mother hears the voices and stops pedalling for a moment.)
CHILDREN:  We are the Coal Hill Gifted and Talented.

[Trafalgar Square]

(The Tardis is disappearing underneath ivy.)
DANNY: Right, come on, team.
(They pull at the greenery.)
CLARA: When they're done, you need to get in your box and go.
DOCTOR: We're all going. We're taking the kids.
CLARA: Taking them where? What are you going do with them? Leave them on an asteroid? Find a space academy for the gifted and talented? They just want their mums and dads, and they're never going to stop wanting them.
DOCTOR: I can save you and Danny.
CLARA: Danny Pink will never leave those kids so long as he is breathing.
(The door is uncovered. The children cheer.)
DANNY: Come on, team.
BRADLEY: Can we take another selfie, sir?
DANNY: Of course. Come on, then.
CHILDREN: Yes!
DOCTOR: I can save you.
CLARA: I don't want you to.
DOCTOR: What, you don't want to live?
CLARA: Of course I want to live. I just
DOCTOR: What?
CLARA: Don't make me say it.
DOCTOR: Say what?
CLARA: I don't want to be the last of my kind.
DOCTOR: Then why did you bring us all here?
CLARA: Because it's the only way to get you back to the Tardis, make you think you're saving someone. Well, you know what, Doctor? This time, the human race is saving you. 
(Clara unlocks the Tardis door.)
CLARA: Make it worthwhile.
DOCTOR: This is my world, too. I walk your earth, I breathe your air.
CLARA: And on behalf of this world, you're very welcome. Now, go. Save the next one.
DOCTOR: Maebh! I'm sorry that I couldn't help you.
MAEBH: You helped me loads. I thought it was all my fault. I feel much better now. Are you going to get rid of the forest?
CLARA: Hard to get rid of a flame-proof forest, Maebh, eh? Come on.
(Clara and Maebh join Danny and the boys at the lion. The Doctor goes into the Tardis while Samson tries to read the news headlines on his phone.)
SAMSON: Government crews have been deployed with the latest defo, deefoo
(Danny takes his phone and reads.)
DANNY: Defoliant agents, Samson. They're used to take the leaves off the trees so they're easier to burn.
BRADLEY: That's harsh.
(The Tardis engines start.)
BRADLEY: Where's he going?
CLARA: Home. He's going home. Which is exactly where we're going.

[Tardis]

(The Doctor looks at the growing solar flare on the scanner.)
DOCTOR: Flame-proof forest. Flame-proof forest. A thousand atom bombs and no one hurt. I am Doctor Idiot!

[Forest]

(Not many trees in this part.)
DOCTOR [OC]: Clara! Come back here! Come back!
DANNY: He's calling you.
CLARA: Yes. Let him call. This is more important.
(The Doctor comes running.)
DOCTOR: Clara! Mister Pink! Maebh! All of you! Quick, quick! Come back. Come back. Come on.
(The children turn and run back to him.)
DOCTOR: Maebh, quick. Good girl, good girl. Come on.

[Tardis]

(Teachers and pupils are sitting on the steps to the gallery while the Doctor gives his lesson on the solar flare.)
DOCTOR: It's there on the screen, look. Big solar flare headed this way. A thousand kilometres a second. Coronal mass ejection. Geomagnetic storm. It's huge. It's brewing up a solar wind
big enough to blow this whole planet away.
(Blank faces.)
DOCTOR: I assumed your teachers have mentioned this?
CLARA: I thought it would spoil an otherwise enjoyable walk.
DOCTOR: Okay. Okay. Well, this is the bad news. The good news is, it's happened before. And you're still here. The Tunguska Blast, 1908. That should have blown the whole planet off its axis, but it didn't. It knocked a few trees over. Well, a few tens of thousands of trees over. Curu in Brazil. Same story. Earth should have been smashed, but it wasn't. What do these things have in common?
RUBY: They're really, really scaring us?
DOCTOR: Trees. Whenever there's a planet-threatening, extra-terrestrial impact, trees. Massive forest, filling the atmosphere with oxygen. Pumping it up like a massive, highly inflammable airbag, so that when trouble hits
SAMSON: Everyone dies.
DOCTOR: No. The impact burns off the excess oxygen. You have some fairly hectic weather for a few days and some fairly trippy looking sunsets, but apart from that, you will be all right. I was wrong. The trees are not your enemy. They're your shield. They've been saving you since for ever. Protecting you from everything that space can throw at you.
CLARA: The wide ring. The red ring. In the museum, Ruby saw a cross-section of a tree. One of the rings was wider than the others, and red.
DOCTOR: Atmospheric dust, captured by the trees. The fingerprint of an asteroid. Happy Red Ring Day.
RUBY: I don't get it. If they're good, then why are we chopping them down?
DANNY: The Government are sending out defoliating teams. They're dropping chemicals on them right now.
DOCTOR: What is it with you people? You hear voices, you want to shut them up. The trees come to save you, you want to chop them down.
CLARA: Or you think you need to save the world when it's already saving itself.
DOCTOR: I did admit that I was wrong. Excellent. Mobile networks are still operative. Right. We are going to call everyone on Earth and tell them to leave the trees alone.
MAEBH: Can I do it? I started it. I should finish it.
DOCTOR: Okay. Okay. Class project. Save the Earth.
(So the children sprawl on the floor by the console, making suggestions while Maebh writes her script.)
MAEBH: Okay. And I think that's it.
(The Doctor flicks a switch, and everyone's mobile phone rings inside the Tardis and around the good green world.

[Trafalgar Square]

(Including that of Maebh's mother, who has just arrived. She answers it.)
MAEBH [OC]: Essential services have been disrupted due to an unexpected forest.
MAEBH'S MUM: Maebh? Where are you?

[Tardis]

MAEBH: We'd like to reassure you that the situation will be rectified very soon. Please don't be scared. And please don't chop, spray or harm the trees. They're here to help. Be less scared. Be more trusting. Oh, and Annabel Arden, please come home.
(The Doctor ends the transmission.)
DOCTOR: Okay, who would like to witness a once in a billion years solar event at close quarters?
(Maebh looks at the scanner.)
MAEBH: Mum! There's my mum!

[Trafalgar Square]

(A joyful reunion.)
MAEBH'S MUM: I thought I'd lost you too.
MAEBH: Never. Not ever.
CLARA: So, trip to space, anyone?
RUBY: I want my mum.
SAMSON: I slightly want my mum, too.
CLARA: Tell them, Mister Pink, what an educational opportunity
DANNY: You, you go. This. This is enough for me.
CLARA: What? Coronal ejections, geomagnetic storms. How often do you get a playlist like that?
DANNY: I was a soldier. I put myself at risk. I didn't try too hard to survive, but somehow, here I am. And now I can see what I nearly lost. And it's enough. I don't want to see more things. I want to see the things in front of me more clearly. There are wonders here, Clara Oswald. Bradley saying please, that's a wonder. One person is more amazing, harder to understand, but more amazing than universes.
CLARA: Really? What person is that, then?
(Danny and Clara kiss. The children cheer and applaud.)
RUBY: I told you. I said so, didn't I?

[Brompton Road]

(Heading back to Cromwell Road, passing Knightsbridge tube.)
CLARA: We could have a picnic.
DANNY: You can't. You've got marking.
CLARA: Oh. Well, no, no, no. That was, er, from ages ago. You see, what happened was
DANNY: They always write the date neatly at the top of the page.
CLARA: Yeah, they do, don't they?
DANNY: Last Friday. You were on the Tardis last Friday. Today, you thought the world was going to end. You still didn't tell me the truth.
CLARA: I tried. He interrupted.
DANNY: I just want to know the truth. I don't care what it is. I just want to know it. Like Maebh said. Like the forest. Fear a little bit less, trust a bit more.
CLARA: Okay. Well
DANNY: No, not now. Go home and do your marking. Think about it, then tell me. I saved you from a tiger today. I deserve at least that.
CLARA: Yes, you did. And yes, you do.

[Space]

(Clara and the Doctor are looking out of the Tardis doorway.)
DOCTOR: I hope I'm right. It would be slightly awkward if the world was destroyed at this point.
CLARA: What?
(The solar flare reaches Earth's atmosphere, igniting the surplus oxygen as it flows around.)
DOCTOR: There goes the planet-sized airbag. That's the trees, harvesting the solar fire.

[Room]

(Someone else is watching it on their computer screen.)
MISSY: Now, that was surprising. And I love surprises.
(But she doesn't look as if she means it.)

[Clara's balcony]

(The Tardis is parked in the living room. As the Doctor and Clara watch, the forest disappears in a succession of golden sparkles, revealing the hidden buildings and roads.)
CLARA: That is amazing. How will they explain this tomorrow?
DOCTOR: You'll all forget it ever happened.
CLARA: We are not going to forget an overnight forest.
DOCTOR: You forgot the last time. You remembered the fear and you put it into fairy stories. It's a human superpower, forgetting. If you remembered how things felt, you'd have stopped having wars. And stopped having babies.
(The golden glow spreads over the planet and vanishes, leaving behind the familiar blue oceans and brown dry land. Shame. The reforestation of the Sahara might have been useful.)

[Outside the Arden home]

(Mother and daughter walk home, and Maebh spots a pair of eyes looking out from an overgrown Hydrangea in their neighbour's front garden. The bush disappears in a mass of golden sparkles and a girl stands up.)
MAEBH'S MUM: Annabel! My Annabel!
MAEBH:I knew you'd be here. The thought of you came to me.

[Park]

(Danny Pink walks past the magnificent war memorial in Alexandra Gardens, Cathays Park, Cardiff whilst pretending to be in Shoreditch, London. His mobile phone rings.)
DANNY: Clara!
CLARA [OC]: Shut up.
DANNY: Is that how we communicate now?

[Clara's flat]

CLARA: Shut up, shut up, shut up. I need to talk to you.

[Park]

DANNY: All right. Well, I'll be there in a couple of minutes, so

[Clara's flat]

No, no, Not while you're in the room.

[Park]

DANNY: Oh, stupid me. The very idea.

[Clara's flat]

CLARA: Shut up!
DANNY [OC]: Okay.
CLARA: Stay shut up.

[Park]

DANNY: Okay.
CLARA [OC]: Things to say.

[Clara's flat]

CLARA: Not all of them good.
DANNY [OC]: Oh, wouldn't it be better

[Park]

DANNY: If I was actually there?
CLARA [OC]: Oh, Danny, everything is

[Clara's flat]

CLARA: Better when you're here, but maybe
(She turns to look at the array of post-it notes on her bookshelves. Some say PSI, Impossible Girl, Saibra, Vastra, Blinovitch, Robin Hood, Lying, Dinosaur in London.)
CLARA: Maybe not this. Okay  Er. Okay, before all of that. Before all of the stuff

[Park]

CLARA [OC]: That I did wrong

[Clara's flat]

(She takes down the note that says Just Say It.)
CLARA: I love you.

[Road]

DANNY: I love you.
(Danny is walking out towards the main road.)
CLARA: No, not like that. Not like it's automatic.

[Clara's flat]

CLARA: Not like it's how you end the phone call, the sign off, the pat on the back.

[Park]

DANNY: Clara

[Clara's flat]

CLARA: Danny, I'll never say those words again. Not to anybody else, ever. Those words, from me, are yours now.
(Danny walks out onto the main road. Clara doesn't get a reply so after a pause -)
CLARA: So, er. That's a thing.
(Just the sound of cars travelling on the road.)
CLARA: Okay, Danny? Er, there's more but that's kind of the headline. Okay, Danny, please speak to me, This is, this is killing me.
(Still nothing.)
CLARA: Danny, I love you. And you are the last person who's ever going to hear me say that.
WOMAN [OC]: Hello? Hello, is someone there?
CLARA: Hello? Er, yeah. Who's this?
WOMAN [OC]: I just picked up the phone, I'm sorry. I found it.
CLARA: Oh. Er, okay. Er, can you please just put me back on the phone to Danny? I was talking to Danny.
WOMAN [OC]: I'm sorry. I'm so sorry.
CLARA: Okay, er, what are you sorry about? Could you please just pass the phone back to 
WOMAN [OC]: He was crossing the road. 'I found the phone, it must have just got thrown. The car, it just came out of nowhere.

[Road]

WOMAN: I'm so sorry.
(The traffic is at a standstill. People have stopped to look, and the emergency services are on their way, sirens wailing. Clara drops the phone and runs along the street. She gets there just as the police are taping the scene off.)

ARMITAGE [OC]: By now, I'm sure you've heard the rumours, and it is with great sadness that I must confirm them to be true.
(A little shrine with photographs, notes and flowers is set up at the park entrance.)
ARMITAGE [OC]: I have gathered you all here today to say that Mister Pink, that Danny Pink has sadly passed away. I'm sure you'll all join me in wishing his family and friends our sincerest condolences. Mister Pink was an inspiration to all of those who knew him. A soldier, a teacher, a friend. It was no secret that he had a close relationship with Miss Oswald, and our thoughts and prayers are with her too.
(The Tardis is sitting on a ledge in a volcanic caldera.)

[Clara's kitchen]

(Full of Calla lilies and sympathy cards. Her phone is ringing, and continues to ring throughout the scene. Caller ID says it is The Doctor calling. Clara's gran walks in.)
GRAN: Hello, love. You all right? Oh, of course you're not. Sorry. Of course you're not all right. You know what you should do? You should cry. Let go.
CLARA: Of what?
GRAN: It's a terrible thing. Just a terrible, terrible thing.
CLARA: It wasn't terrible.
GRAN: Clara?
CLARA: It was boring.
GRAN: Boring?
CLARA: It was ordinary. People just kept walking with their iPods and their shopping bags. He was alive, and then he was dead and it was nothing. Like stepping off a bus.
GRAN: He deserved better. And so did you.
CLARA: I don't deserve anything. Nobody deserves anything. But I am owed better. I am owed.
GRAN: Who owes you?
DOCTOR [OC]: Clara! Clara?
(Clara picks up the phone and puts on a cheerful face. So, she was actually calling him?)
CLARA: Hey!

[Tardis]

(The Doctor enters.)
DOCTOR: Sorry, I was busy. What's happening?

[Clara's kitchen]

CLARA: Oh, nothing. You know, same old, same old.

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: Well, you're only human.

[Clara's kitchen]

DOCTOR [OC]: So what I can do for you, Clara?

[Cauldera]

(The Doctor is lying outside the Tardis as the volcano spits lava and lumps of rock. He wakes with a start to see Clara standing in the smoke by the edge of the ledge.)
DOCTOR: Clara?

[Tardis]

(Clara enters. The Doctor is working on a piece of machinery.)
CLARA: Start her up.
DOCTOR: Where are we going?
CLARA: Away.
DOCTOR: From?
CLARA: Just away.
DOCTOR: Well, normally you say work or kids or dishes or dullness. So what's happened?
(Clara goes downstairs to his workbench, takes a key from a round box and puts it in her coat pocket.)
CLARA: A volcano.
DOCTOR: I'm sorry?
CLARA: I've never seen an active volcano, do you know one?
DOCTOR: What's so great about seeing a volcano? It's just a sort of leaky mountain.
CLARA: I've never seen lava.
(She takes something out of his coat pocket and puts it into hers.)
DOCTOR: It's rubbish.
CLARA: Prove it.

[Cauldera]

CLARA: It's on your neck.

[Tardis]

(In flight. Clara finds another key hidden inside The Time Traveller's Wife. Good book, interesting concept.)
CLARA: Do you still have those sleep patch things?
DOCTOR: You can't have one.
CLARA: I'm having trouble sleeping.
DOCTOR: You still can't have one.
CLARA: Can I have one?
DOCTOR: No, you can't have one.
(So Clara takes the box of them from a small set of drawers.)
DOCTOR: So, volcano. What's so good about lava?
(Clara puts one of the patches on the back of the Doctor's neck.)

[Cauldera]

(Clara is holding out her hand.)
CLARA: You told me once what it would take to destroy a Tardis key. That's what's so good about lava. All seven. From all of your hiding places.
(She holds one up.)
DOCTOR: Clara, what are you doing? Don't. Be very, very careful with that. Those are very, very
(She throws it backwards into the lava.)
CLARA: Do I have your attention?
DOCTOR: Yes.
CLARA: Good.
DOCTOR: No. Not good, Clara.
CLARA: Danny Pink.
DOCTOR: Yeah?
CLARA: Is dead.
DOCTOR: And?
CLARA: Seriously?
DOCTOR: And?
CLARA: And fix it. Change it. Change what happened. Save him. Bring him back.
(She holds up another key and we all remember what happened in Father's Day.)
DOCTOR: No.
(She throws the key away.)
CLARA: Five left. Every time you say no to me, I will throw another key down there. Do we understand each other?
DOCTOR: Well, I understand you. Let's not get carried away.
CLARA: Time can be rewritten.
DOCTOR: With precision. With great care. And not today. But you know that of course, otherwise you wouldn't be threatening me.
CLARA: Did you just say no?
DOCTOR: If I change the events that brought you here, you will never come here and ask me to change those events. Paradox loop. The timeline disintegrates. Your timeline. And yes!
CLARA: Yes?
DOCTOR: Yes. I did just say no. Throw away the key.
CLARA: I have seen you change time, I have seen you break any rule you want.
DOCTOR: I know when I can, I know when I can't. Throw the key.
CLARA: I know what you're doing. You're trying to take control.
DOCTOR: I am in control. Throw away the key. Do as you are told.
CLARA: No!
DOCTOR: Well, either you do as you're told or stop threatening me. There really isn't a third option here.
CLARA: Do you know what, Doctor? When it comes to taking control, you really are out of your depth.
(She throws all the remaining keys bar one into the lava.)
CLARA: One last chance. And I don't care about the rules, I don't give a damn about paradoxes. Save Danny. Bring him back or I swear you will never step inside your Tardis again.
DOCTOR: No.
CLARA: Do as you are told.
DOCTOR: No.
CLARA: Say it again so I know you mean it.
DOCTOR: No!
CLARA: I'm not kidding, Doctor.
DOCTOR: Neither am I.
CLARA: I will do it!
DOCTOR: Clara, my Clara, I don't think you will!
(The last key goes into the lava.)
CLARA: Oh, I'd say I'm sorry but I'd do it again.
(Clara falls to her knees and cries.)
CLARA: I'd do it again. Well, what are you doing? Why are you just standing there? Do you understand what I have just done?
DOCTOR: Look in your hand.
CLARA: There's nothing in my hand.
DOCTOR: Clara, look in your hand.
CLARA: The keys, they're gone. They're down there. They've gone.
DOCTOR: Clara, look in your hand.
CLARA: There's nothing in my hand.
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, yes, there is. Look.
(The sleep patch is in the middle of Clara's palm.)
DOCTOR: Did you seriously think that that was going to work on me?
(And back into the Tardis, to when Clara put the patch on the Doctor's neck. He grabs her hand and neatly presses the patch into her palm instead.)
DOCTOR: They're not sleep patches. They induce a dream state.
(He removes the patch from her palm.)

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: Makes you very suggestible.
(He picks up the Tardis keys from the floor.)
DOCTOR: I allowed the whole scenario to play out just as you planned. I was curious about how far you would go.
CLARA: Well, now you know.
DOCTOR: Yeah. Now I know.
CLARA:I love him.
(The Doctor scans her with the sonic screwdriver.)
DOCTOR: Yes, you're quite the mess of chemicals, aren't you?
CLARA: So, what now? What do we do now? You and me, what happens now? Doctor?
DOCTOR: Go to hell.
(The Tardis lands.)
CLARA: Fair enough. Absolutely fair enough.
(She walks to the door.)
DOCTOR: Clara? You asked me what we're going to do. I told you. We're going to hell. Or wherever it is people go when they die. If there is anywhere. Wherever it is, we're going to go there and we're going to find Danny. And if it is in any way possible, we're going to bring him home. Almost every culture in the universe has some concept of an afterlife. I always meant to have a look around, see if I could find one.
CLARA: You're going to help me?
DOCTOR: Well, why wouldn't I help you?
CLARA: Because of what I just did. I just
DOCTOR: You betrayed me. Betrayed my trust, you betrayed our friendship, you betrayed everything that I've ever stood for. You let me down!
CLARA: Then why are you helping me?
DOCTOR: Why? Do you think I care for you so little that betraying me would make a difference? Stop it with the eyes. Don't do that with the eyes. How do you do that anyway? It's like they inflate. Cut out the whining while you're at it. We've got work to do. This is it, Clara, one of those moments.
CLARA: What moments?
DOCTOR: The darkest day. The blackest hour. Chin up, shoulders back. Let's see what we're made of, you and I. Switching off the safeguards, turning off the nav-com. Remember, we did this before. We plugged you into the Tardis telepathic interface.
CLARA: We ended up all over Danny's timestream.
DOCTOR: Because you and he are linked. Strongly linked. Your timestreams are intertwined. So if he's anywhere at all, that link will hold. Give me your hands.
CLARA: Doctor
DOCTOR: We're in a hurry.
CLARA: I don't deserve a friend like you.
DOCTOR: Clara, I'm terribly sorry, but I'm exactly what you deserve.
(He puts her hands into the orange gloop part of the console.)
DOCTOR: Think about Danny. Think about the man you lost. Let it hurt. Let it burn. But don't bleat. Don't ask, why him? Why me? Forget all that. Ask one question. Just one. Ask, where is Danny Pink now? Where is he now?
(And after a few moments, the time rotor starts up.)
DOCTOR: Well, the Tardis thinks he's somewhere.
[Seb's office]

(Danny is sitting at a desk with his head resting on his hand. It slips and he wakes. Somewhere a phone rings, and it sounds like a busy office outside. He looks around at a set of in-trays, pens in holders, and a name plate on the desk which says - Nethersphere After Death Department  SEB. The company logo is a very large circle with a small one attached at seven o'clock. The door opens.)
SEB: Has anyone offered you a coffee?
DANNY: Um.  Well, no.
SEB: Could we have some coffee along here, please? The good kind. We've got a new one.
(Seb shuts the door and sits at his desk.)
SEB: Five minutes, tops. Best to wait for the good coffee.
DANNY: Where am I?
SEB: Sometimes it's just the instant.
(Seb pulls a 'nasty taste' face.)
DANNY: Where am I?
SEB: Well, big question. Try to take that one slowly. We have been trying to contact family members, but really there is so much admin
DANNY: I wasn't here, I was
SEB: Yeah. That last thing that happened to you, that really happened, I'm afraid. But that's life. Well, not life, I suppose, but. There are some forms to fill in. Might help you relax.
Well, they won't, but we do need them filled in. Right, important thing. Need to know. Are you being cremated? Sorry, it's a fairly urgent question.
DANNY: I don't know. I've never really thought of that.
SEB: I'm going to put you down as a yes, that's pretty much the default these days. If people only knew.
DANNY: Only knew what?
(Seb rolls his chair back to the door and shouts through the wall.)
SEB: We've got a burner in number twelve. Tell them to prep, please.
DANNY: Burner?
(Seb rolls back to the deck.)
SEB: Yeah, it's fine, we'll come to that.
DANNY: But I don't understand where I am.
(Seb looks at the large pair of curtains covering one wall. Danny gets up and opens them, then gasps. He is looking out of a round window at a host of buildings which appear to be on the inside of a small Dyson Sphere.)
SEB: Oh, look at that. You can see my house from here. Yeah, sorry, probably not helping.
DANNY: Where am I? Er.
SEB:  You sort of know, don't you? Most people kind of know, it's just hard to get traction on the concept.
DANNY: Where am I?
SEB: Okay. You're dead, and this is what's next.
DANNY: I'm not dead. How can I be dead?
SEB: Our sincere condolences.
DANNY: I'm standing right here.
SEB: Yes, you are. Welcome to the Underworld. Otherwise known as the Nethersphere, or the Promised Land. It's where you go when you die.
(Danny starts to hyperventilate.)
SEB: Would you like to breathe into a bag?

[Tardis]

(The Tardis materialises.)
CLARA: Where are we?
DOCTOR: Nav-com's offline. We'll have to do this old school.
CLARA: But this is where Danny is?
DOCTOR: Almost certainly not. It's where there's a connection with Danny. According to the Tardis, this is where it's most likely that your timeline will re-intersect with his. And that won't do.
CLARA: What won't?
DOCTOR: You won't. Look at you. I need sceptical, clever, critical. I don't need mopey. It put years on your face. And what if people see us together? It looks like you've been melted.
CLARA: Are you forgetting why we're here?
DOCTOR: We're here to get your boyfriend back from the dead, so buck up and give me some attitude.

[Entrance lobby]

(The Tardis has parked herself between two of four columns at the bottom of a set of steps leading up to a large urn on a plinth, which has an eternal flame burning in it. The place is dark, and the Doctor shines a torch on an small obelisk with the Company logo on it in gold and the words Rest In Peace, We Promise carved into the granite. They look up at ranks and ranks of glass fronted cubicles on three sides of this marble edifice. There is the sound of water nearby.)
CLARA: Fish tanks?
DOCTOR: In a mausoleum?
(They go up the steps to the urn. Its plinth also has the logo and motto on it.)
CLARA: What does that mean?
DOCTOR: It means those are definitely not fish tanks.
(They turn right at the urn and enter - )

[Gallery]

(Lined on the right hand side with floor to ceiling tanks. Each contains a skeleton sitting on a chair.)
CLARA: Why?
DOCTOR: I don't know.
CLARA: Okay, I'm assuming they didn't actually drown in there.
DOCTOR: No. They were placed, after death. These are tombs. Water tombs, some sort of fluid, anyway.
CLARA: With chairs?
DOCTOR: With chairs, yes. Extra comfort for the deceased. It pays to die rich.
(There is a name under each tank. Clara looks at Xylo Jones then moves on.)
CLARA: Oh, God. Am I going to find Danny now? Is that why the Tardis brought us here? I don't want to see him like that.
DOCTOR: Good point. Tombs with windows. Who wants to watch their loved ones rot? Why would anyone go to so much trouble just to keep watch on the dead?
(As they walk on, a skeleton turns its head to watch them. The Doctor finds a small book on a lecturn. He opens his fingers across a blank page and a cube rises up out of it. He pushes it into the corridor and opens it. It displays that two ring logo with 3W inside it while Bach's Air on a G String plays softly. A voice speaks the words that then scroll down.)
MISSY [OC]: 3W. Death is not an end. But we can we help with that. Ever since 3W encountered the truth about the death experience, 'we have been working hard to find a better life for the deceased. At 3W, afterlife means aftercare.
CLARA: Okay. Bit strange?
DOCTOR: Very. Why have the scrolling and a voice? Is it difficult?
CLARA: Is what difficult?
DOCTOR: Reading all those words back to front. Come on. We've come a long way.
(Missy walks through the logo, which disappears.)
MISSY: Hello. I hope you're well. How may I assist you with your death?
DOCTOR: Well, there is, er, no immediate hurry. We're just, er. We're just
CLARA: Browsing.
DOCTOR: Yeah, yeah, browsing.
MISSY: Please, take all the time you need. At 3W, you always have the rest of your life.
DOCTOR: Oh, good. That's good to know, Clara, isn't it?
CLARA: Yeah. Great.
DOCTOR: Exactly what is 3W?
MISSY: Apologies. Clearly you have not received the official 3W greetings package.
DOCTOR: Well, you know, it's just an unexpected
(Missy lunges at the Doctor, pushing him against the wall then kissing him very intently. The Doctor's eyes bulge and he grabs the wall. Missy finishes by kissing the tip of his nose three times, then she steps back.)
MISSY: Welcome to the 3W Institute.
DOCTOR: (breathless) Clara, is it over now?
CLARA: I think it's over, yeah.
MISSY: You also have not received the official welcome package.
CLARA: Oh, I'm good, thanks. No worries.
DOCTOR: Who are you?
MISSY: I am Missy.
CLARA: Missy?
MISSY: Mobile Intelligent Systems Interface. I am a multi-function, interactive welcome-droid. Helping you to help me to help you.
DOCTOR: You're very er realistic.
CLARA: Tongues?
DOCTOR: Shut up.
MISSY: I am fully programmed with social interaction norms appropriate to a range of visitors. Please indicate if you'd like me to adjust my intimacy setting.
(The Doctor peels himself off the wall.)
DOCTOR: Oh, yes, please. Please do that. Do that now right now.
CLARA: Maybe just a tad, yeah.
DOCTOR: I need to speak to whoever's in charge here.
MISSY: (as Maggie Smith) I am in charge.
DOCTOR: Well, who's in charge of you?
MISSY: I'm in charge of me.
DOCTOR: Well, who repairs you? Who, who maintains you?
MISSY: I am programmed for self-repair. I am maintained by my heart.
(Missy takes the Doctor's hand and places it on her bosom.)
MISSY: Is everything in order?
DOCTOR: Who maintains your heart?
MISSY: My heart is maintained by the Doctor.
DOCTOR: Doctor who?
MISSY: (shouts) Doctor Chang!
(Missy walks away from the Doctor, who doesn't move his hand.)
CHANG [OC]: Who's there?
CHANG: Hello?
CLARA: Hello.
DOCTOR: Hello.
CLARA: You can probably take your hand down now, Doctor.
CHANG: So. Hey. Condolences.
CLARA: Condolences?
CHANG: It's a mausoleum. It's our hello. Is there a particular dead person you want to talk to?
CLARA: Yes. Yes, there is.
CHANG: This way then.
DOCTOR: Are you okay?
CLARA: No.
(He takes her hand.)
DOCTOR: Good. There would be something very wrong if you were.
(All the skeletons turn their heads to watch them leave. Missy smiles, then looks up at a red spotted globe turning up in the corner.)

[Balcony]

(Seb opens the doors and lets Danny go first into the night air with emergency vehicle sirens wailing in the distance.)
SEB: Bit of fresh air. Do you good.
DANNY: Why's it so cold here?
SEB: And the Wi-Fi is better out here. Don't know why.
DANNY: Wi-Fi?
SEB: Yeah, still a bit spotty, but basically
DANNY: You have Wi-Fi here?
(Seb is calling something up on his tablet computer.)
DANNY: You. You have iPads in the afterlife?
SEB: IPads? We have Steve Jobs. Listen, another big question for you. Have you ever killed anybody?
DANNY: This is surreal.
SEB: Imagine embryos had telephones.
DANNY: That's really not helping.
SEB: Go with me. Go with me. Imagine babies in wombs could talk to other babies in other wombs. What would they say? What would they think life was like if they could talk among themselves?
DANNY: I really have no idea.
SEB: They'd think that life was nine months long. Then, boom, trap door opens, out you fall, gone for ever. Never hear from those guys again. Nothing at the end of the cord.
DANNY: Okay.
SEB: This isn't really an afterlife. It's just more life than you were expecting.
DANNY: Why did you ask me if I'd killed anyone?
SEB: Before you were a teacher, you spent some time as a soldier.
DANNY: Yeah, so?
SEB: Any regrets? Bad memories?
DANNY: Is that, is that any of your business?
SEB: Yes.

[Memories]

(In either Iraq or Afghanistan, Danny and his troop are returning fire in a village.)
SOLDIER: Get to cover, now!

[Balcony]

SEB: Sorry if I triggered something then. Memory flashes can be very impactful in the early stages.
DANNY: Why?
SEB: Why what?
(Danny recalls taking a grenade from his pouch and throwing it into the remains of a building.)
DANNY: Why is it any of your business?
SEB: We've had a request to meet you. Any idea who that would be from?
(Danny recalls bursting into a building and immediately opening fire.)
SEB: It's been given a priority, which usually means
DANNY: Means what?
(Danny has shot someone.)
SEB: Well, anyway, we've arranged a meet-up.
DANNY: When?
SEB: Come in.
(Danny sees the person from his memories. A young boy in a football shirt is peering around the door.)
SOLDIER [OC]: Danny, repeat, is the building secure?'
SEB: So, I guess you remember him, yeah?
SOLDIER [OC]: Danny? Danny!

[Chang's office]

CHANG: Come in, come in. Going to need to take a reading off you.
(There is one of those big tanks in here, too. The Doctor goes to take a look around.)
CLARA: A reading?
CHANG: Won't hurt.
(He flicks a switch.)
CLARA: What won't?
DOCTOR: How does the body keep its integrity? Why isn't it just a bunch of bones floating about?
CHANG: Each body is encased in a support exoskeleton. 

[Gallery]

CLARA [OC]: An invisible exoskeleton?
CHANG: It's only invisible in the water. There's a specially engineered refraction index in the fluid so we can see the tank resident unimpeded by the support mechanisms.
(Missy is listening to the conversation.)
DOCTOR [OC]: So each skeleton is inside something?
(She puts her hand on a tank and a skeletal hand reaches out.)

[Chang's office]

CLARA: Are you serious? X-ray water?
CHANG: It's so cool. Look at this. We call it dark water.
(He puts his arm into a sample jar of it. His wrist watch and jacket sleeve vanish.)
CHANG: Only organic matter can be seen through it.
(He removes his arm and dries it off.)
CHANG: I keep saying they should use this stuff in swimming pools.
DOCTOR: Why?
CHANG: Think about it.
DOCTOR: I am thinking about it. Why?
CLARA: Doesn't matter. 3W, what kind of name is that? What does it mean?
(The skeleton in the tank behind them turns its head.)
CHANG: Well, you know, don't you? You're here on business or they wouldn't have let you in. Sorry. Should have checked. Who are you?
DOCTOR: I thought that you would never ask. Sort out your security protocols, they're a disgrace.
(He gets out the psychc paper.)
CHANG: Another government inspection? So soon? Why is there all this swearing?
DOCTOR: Oh, I've got a lot of internalised anger. What does 3W stand for?
CHANG: Well, the three words.
CLARA: What three words?
CHANG: Seriously? You don't know?
DOCTOR: Never mind what we know and what we don't know, just answer our question.
CHANG: Because people who don't know, when they hear about this, they can freak out.
DOCTOR: We're not going to freak out.
CHANG: If you've had a recent loss, this might be, this will be disturbing.
DOCTOR: She'll be fine.
CLARA: Speak for me again, I'll detach something from you. I'll be fine.
CHANG: You know how people are scared of dying? Like, everybody.
DOCTOR: Of course. It's the most fundamental fear in the universe.
CHANG: They'd be a lot more scared if they knew what it was really like.
(Chang activates the see through computer screen on his desk.)

[Balcony]

(Danny is sitting at the table opposite the young boy.)
DANNY: So. You okay? I'm sorry. I just
(Danny reaches for the boy's hand. He recoils and runs off.)
DANNY: Hey, hey. Hey, listen. Listen  Hey!
SEB: Probably best not, eh? Doesn't speak much.
DANNY: Why would he want to see me?
(A man screams in agony nearby.)
DANNY: What the hell is that?
SEB: Sounds like somebody left their body to science. Okay. Er,  It's probably time to explain why you're always feeling cold.

[Chang's office]

CHANG: White noise off the telly. We've all heard it. A few years ago, Doctor Skarosa, our founder, did something unexpected. He played that noise through a translation matrix of his own devising. This is a recording of what he heard.
(A sound wave of multiple voices.)
CLARA: Okay, people, voices.
DOCTOR: So what?
CHANG: Over time, Doctor Skarosa became convinced these were the voices of the recently departed. He believed it was a telepathic communication from the dead.
DOCTOR: Why? Was he an idiot?
CHANG: He was able to isolate some of the voices, hear what they were saying.
DOCTOR: So, an idiot then.
(Chang turns off the recording.)
CLARA: Shut up, Doctor.
CHANG: What I'm about to play you will change your life and not for the better. These are the three words which caused Doctor Skarosa to set up institutes, like this one, all over the world, to protect the dead. If you'd rather not hear these words, there's still time
DOCTOR: Can you just hurry up, please, or I'll hit you with my shoe.
VOICE [OC]: Don't cremate me. Don't cremate me!
CHANG: There is one simple, horrible possibility that has never occurred to anyone throughout human history.
VOICE [OC]: Don't cremate me. Don't cremate me!
CLARA: Don't say it.
CHANG: The dead remain conscious. The dead are fully aware of everything that is happening to them.  

[Balcony]

SEB: So your mind is here. Your soul, whatever you want to call it. And you're in your new body in your new world, but you're still connected to your old body in the old world. You're still going to feel what it feels.
DANNY: That's why I'm cold.
SEB: They're keeping you in a cold place, yeah. You did say you were being cremated?
(Seb's tablet beeps.)
SEB: Sorry, I'll get this.
DANNY: Sorry. Sorry, are you telling me
SEB: Wow! Oh, that's rare. This never happens.
DANNY: Wow, what now? What never happens?
SEB: You've got a call.
DANNY: A call.
SEB: From the other side.
DANNY: Meaning?
SEB: Do you know somebody called Clara Oswald?

[Chang's office]

DOCTOR: Fakery. All of it. It's a con, it's a racket!
CHANG: I promise you this is not a con.
CLARA: What's that beeping?

[Gallery]

DOCTOR [OC]: Never mind about beeping. Who cares about beeping? The dead are dead. 'They're not talking to you out of your television sets. They're just gone
(Missy claps her hands, and the skeletons all stand up.)
DOCTOR [OC]: And all these poor souls down there in these tanks, I'm sorry, but they're just dead and they're not coming back.

[Chang's office]

(Chang manipulates a device.)
DANNY [OC]: Clara? Clara? Clara, are you there?
CLARA: Danny! I can hear you. Is that you?

[Balcony]

CLARA [OC]: Oh, please, say it's you. 
DANNY: That's her, that's Clara!
SEB: Yeah, you're really lucky. It hardly ever happens.
(The connection is audio only on Seb's tablet, then the signal drops out.)
DANNY: Where did she go?

[Chang's office]

CHANG: Just lost the signal. But I can track it back, I'm pretty sure.
CLARA: I don't, I don't understand. What is happening?
CHANG: We've been scanning you telepathically since you came in. You said you wanted to speak to someone who'd passed, and we've found you a match in the Nethersphere.
DOCTOR: This isn't possible. The dead don't come back.
(Behind him, the skeleton in the tank stands up.)

[Balcony]

DANNY: Come on, get her back.
SEB: Da-da-da. I'm trying.

[Chang's office]

CLARA: It was him. It was his voice.
DOCTOR: If they scanned you telepathically, they could've lifted a voice print. It could still be a fake.
CHANG: Getting him back, very nearly!

[Balcony]

(The signal is back at 99%.)
DANNY: Clara, can you hear me?

[Chang's office]

CLARA: Yes, Danny, I can hear you. Can you hear me?
DANNY [OC]: Yeah, yeah, I can hear you.

[Balcony]

DANNY: Clara! Oh, God. Clara
CLARA [OC]: What do I do?
DANNY: Who are you talking to?

[Chang's office]

CLARA: Hang on just a moment.
DOCTOR: Question him. Ask him questions only he'd know the answer to. Be sure. You, with me.
CLARA: Where are you going?
DOCTOR: I've got to check out those tanks. There's something that I'm missing.
DANNY [OC]: 'Clara?
DOCTOR: Sceptical and critical, remember? Be strong, even if it breaks your heart.
CHANG: Connection's stabilised. It should be okay.
DOCTOR: Who would harvest dead bodies? I feel like I'm missing something obvious.
(As he walks out through the double doors with windows cut out in the shape of the logo, but symmetrical. Almost like eyes.)
CLARA: Danny?

[Balcony]

DANNY: Yeah, I'm here.

[Chang's office]

CLARA: Danny, I'm so sorry but I'm going to have to ask you some questions.
DANNY: Questions? I swear on anything it's me! 

[Gallery]

(Missy snaps her fingers.)
MISSY: Humankind, bring out your dead.
(The standing skeletons turn and press a button on the wall of their tanks, activating something. The liquid starts to drain from the tanks. The Doctor and Chang enter.)
CHANG: Oh, my God. The tanks The tanks are activating! They're not supposed to do that.
DOCTOR: And all your dead people are standing. Don't you think you skipped the headline?
MISSY: Now, now, children. Naughty, naughty.
DOCTOR: Doctor Chang, your welcome droid has developed a fault.
CHANG: That's not a droid. That's my boss.
MISSY: You know, I might have been guilty of a just teensy little fibette. Doctorr Chang, I really liked working with you. I've enjoyed every day of it.
CHANG: I'm sorry?
MISSY: You know, I've even got a little photograph of you looking so sweet. I'm always going to keep it. Always!
CHANG: Are you going to kill me?
MISSY: Now, come on. Let's not dwell on horrid things. This is going to be our last conversation, and I'm the one who's going to have to live with that.
CHANG: Please don't kill me.
MISSY: Say something nice.
CHANG: Please, please. I don't, I don't want to die. You're going to kill me, aren't you?
MISSY: Say something nice.
CHANG: Please!
MISSY: Doctor Chang, I've got all day. And I'm not going to kill you until you say something nice.
CHANG: It has been an absolute pleasure working with you, and I truly believe that you'll never be able to find it in your heart to murder me.
(Missy holds up a device that fires a heat ray, which incinerates Chang instantly. The Doctor backs away.)
MISSY: Now, I'll be with you in a moment. Just feeling a bit emotional at the moment.
(The Doctor looks up at a tank and sees the water level dropping below the top of a skeleton's head, to reveal a silver metal helmet.)
DOCTOR: Cybermen!

[Balcony]

DANNY: It's me. I, I swear on anything it's me.
CLARA [OC]: The very first restaurant you took me to. That first date. What was it called?
DANNY: Clara, it's me.

[Chang's office]

CLARA: Then what was the name of the restaurant? What was it?

[Balcony]

DANNY: I can't remember!

[Gallery]

DOCTOR: They're Cybermen, all of them. We've got to stop them getting out.
MISSY: Now who's missing the headline? The Nethersphere. You know it's ever so funny, the people that live inside that think they've gone to heaven.
(The Doctor looks up at the globe.)
CLARA [OC]: My birthday. When is it?

[Balcony]

DANNY: November twenty third. That's right, isn't it? I got that one right.
CLARA [OC]: It's pretty basic information. 'Anyone could know that. Say something only you could say.

[Chang's office]

CLARA: Tell me something only Danny would know.

[Gallery]

DOCTOR: That's a matrix data-slice. A Gallifreyan hard drive. Time Lord technology.
MISSY: Imagine you could upload dying minds to that. Edit them. Rearrange them. Get rid of all those boring emotions. Ready to be re-downloaded. Meanwhile, you upgrade the bodies.
Upload the mind, upgrade the body. Cybermen from cyberspace. Now, why has no-one ever thought of that before?
DOCTOR: How did you get hold of Time Lord technology?  Who are you?
MISSY: You know who I am. I told you. You felt it. Surely you did.
DOCTOR: Two hearts.
MISSY: And both of them yours.
DOCTOR: You're a Time Lord.
MISSY: Time Lady, please, I'm old-fashioned.
DOCTOR: Which Time Lady?
MISSY: The one you abandoned, Doctor. The one you left for dead. Didn't you ever think I'd find my way back?
DOCTOR: Clara. Clara. Clara. I've got to get Clara!
(The Doctor runs to the lift door.)
MISSY: Oh, Clara, Clara, Clara! You know I should shoot you in a jealous rage. Now, wouldn't that be sexy? I've turned the lift off, though.
DOCTOR: I presume you have stairs.
MISSY: Well, I'm not a Dalek.
(The Doctor sonicks open the door to the stairs and runs out to -)

[Outside St Paul's Cathedral]

MISSY: Oh, dear, Doctor. Didn't you realise where you were?
(Church bells peal as the look down Ludgate Hill. A number 56 bus drives past.)

[Chang's office]

DANNY [OC]: I love you.
CLARA: No. No, no, no. I'm sorry, but no. Anybody could say that. Anybody would know to say that. Say something only you could tell me. Prove to me you are really Danny.

[Balcony]

DANNY: How?
CLARA: I love you means nothing right now.

[Chang's office]

CLARA: Not until I know who's talking. Say something only Danny could say.

[Balcony]

DANNY: Clara
CLARA [OC]: Danny, if that is you 

[Chang's office]

CLARA: Wherever you are

[Balcony]

CLARA: Whatever it takes, I will be with you again, I swear.
DANNY: No, you won't. You are not coming here.
CLARA [OC]: Nothing will stop me,

[Chang's office]

CLARA: Nothing in the world, as soon as I know it's you.
DANNY: There is only one way

[Balcony]

DANNY: To come here, and you are not doing that.
CLARA [OC]: I'll do anything, Danny, anything. Just say something only you could say.
DANNY: Clara, you have your life. You have your whole life to live. You have to stay there.
CLARA [OC]: No. I have to be with Danny Pink.
DANNY: I love you.

[Chang's offfice]

CLARA: Stop saying that! Don't say that. If you say that again, I swear I will switch this thing off.

[Balcony]

DANNY: Clara
CLARA [OC]: Yes?
DANNY: I love you.
(Clara turns off Chang's computer. Danny sits down and cries. Seb takes back the tablet and calls up another app.)
SEB: These emotions, they're terribly difficult. But, you know, we've got a thing for that. We can help with all these difficult feelings. Just press this.
(On the screen, next to the name Danny Pink, is a button marked Delete.)
SEB: I'll leave you to make a decision. 

[Chang's office]

(Clara turns around to see the Cyberman who, according to the name plaque, is Dr Skarosa. She runs to the door.)
CLARA: Doctor!
(The doors to the now empty tanks swing open. Shame, I was hoping they'd smash their way out like they did from their Tomb. The Cybermen step out and stomp away.)

[St Peter's Hill]

(The Doctor runs down the steps towards the river.)
DOCTOR: Get away from here! All of you, run!
(The Cybermen stomp out of the Cathedral. Ah, memories of The Invasion.)
DOCTOR: Go! Go! Get away from here! Run away!  Run, run! Get away from here all of you, now!
MISSY: I'm sorry, everyone. Another ranting Scotsman in the street. I had no idea there was a match on.
DOCTOR: Get away, go!
MISSY: Stop shouting, love. Stop making a fuss. It's too late. All the graves of planet Earth are about to give birth. You know the key strategic weakness of the human race? The dead outnumber the living.
DOCTOR: Who are you?
MISSY: Oh, you know who I am. I'm Missy.
DOCTOR: Who's Missy?
MISSY: Please, try to keep up. Short for Mistress. Well, I couldn't very well keep calling myself the Master, now could I?
(The Doctor backs away, horrified. The Cybermen continue their march. Danny sobs then pulls his finger away from the Delete button.)

To Be Continued...


Previously
CLARA: Danny Pink is dead.
DOCTOR: We're here to get your boyfriend back from the dead. Those are tombs. Water tombs. Why would anyone go to so much trouble?
SEB: You're dead and, and this is what's next.
DOCTOR: A Gallifreyan hard drive. Time Lord technology.
MISSY: Do you know the key strategic weakness of the human race? The dead outnumber the living.
DOCTOR: Who are you?
MISSY: Oh, you know who I am. I'm Missy. I couldn't very well keep calling myself The Master, now could I?

[Chang's office]

(Cyber Dr Skarosa stomps out of his cubicle, stops by his desk and turns, pointing his weapon at Clara, who was hiding behind it.)
CLARA: Stop! You can't kill me.
CYBER-SKAROSA: Incorrect.
CLARA: I'm a target of strategic value. Alive, I'm a tactical advantage. Dead, I'm your biggest mistake.You don't know who I am.
(Cyber-Skarosa scans her with his chest disc.)
CYBER-SKAROSA: You are Clara Oswald. You are human. You are unimportant.
CLARA: Incorrect. You see, That is what you're supposed to think. That is what everybody thinks.
CYBER-SKAROSA: You are Clara Oswald.
CLARA: Clara Oswald is a cover story, a disguise. There is no Clara Oswald.
CYBER-SKAROSA: Identify.
CLARA: Oh, don't be so slow, it's embarrassing. Who could fool you like this? Who could hide right under your nose? Who could change their face any time they want? Hmm. You see, I'm not Clara Oswald. Clara Oswald has never existed.
CYBER-SKAROSA: Identify.
CLARA: I'm the Doctor.
(And just to try and convince us, they put Jenna's name first and her eyes in the opening titles instead of Peter's.)

[St Peters Hill]

MISSY: Look at them! My boys.
DOCTOR: Cybermen in broad daylight? You think people won't notice?
(They notice, and out come the smart phones to take the photographs. Missy unpins her hat and puts it on the ground at a Cyberman's feet.)
MISSY: Photos with the big metal men, one pound.
(Several coins are thrown into her hat.)
MISSY: Oh, honey!
(One teenage lad takes a selfie of himself, a Cyberman and his girlfriend.)
BOY: There you go.
GIRL Oh, cool. Cool!
(Suddenly the location changes to Cardiff, between The Friary and Queen Street. You can tell because the steps have vanished and a Travelodge and shopping area have appeared, with Live Lounge on the corner.)
MISSY: New York. Paris. Rome. Marrakesh. Brisbane. Glasgow. Everywhere. Anywhere. Me and my boys. We're going viral.
(Missy shows him on her steampunk style smart phone.)
OSGOOD: Would you like me to take a picture? Sorry, selfies are never as good, are they? And you're having a lovely moment. Hang on!
(Osgood snatches Missy's 'phone'. The Doctor grabs Missy's arm.)
MISSY: No, just
DOCTOR: Nice bow tie.
OSGOOD: Bow ties are cool. Big smiles, and now!
(Weapons are taken from pushchairs and backpacks. Soldiers come out of the buildings on both sides.)
SOLDIERS: Move, move, move! Stand by. Surround target. Hold back!
(Once the scene is secure, a blonde woman walks up holding something behind her back.)
KATE: Afternoon. You've picked a lovely day for it. My, don't you look shiny. (to the Doctor) Haircut?
DOCTOR: Bit of a trim.
KATE: Might want to do your roots. The woman.
SOLDIER: Yes, ma'am.
(Missy is held by two soldiers. Kate Lethbridge Stewart addresses the serried ranks of Cybermen.)
KATE: Kate Stewart. Divorcee, mother of two, keen gardener, outstanding bridge player. Also Chief Scientific Officer, Unified Intelligence Taskforce, who currently have you surrounded.
CYBERMAN: Human weaponry is not effective against Cyber technology.
KATE: Sorry, you left this behind on one of your previous attempts.
(She throws down a battered Mondas Cyberman head. A soldier brings the Doctor forward to stand next to her.)
KATE: So now that I have your attention, welcome to the only planet in the universe where we get to say this. He's on the payroll.
DOCTOR: Am I?
KATE: Well, technically.
DOCTOR: How much?
KATE: Shush. Any questions?
(As one, the Cybermen thump the blue disc in the middle of their chests and stamp their feet on the ground. Dust is blown everywhere as little engines in their feet start up. Missy smiles.)
SOLDIER: Back, back, everyone, back!
(The Cybermen zoom up into the air, and out of sight. Osgood turns around to see the lead covering of the dome of St Pauls peeling back like a Chocolate Orange.)
OSGOOD: Oh, my God! Is it supposed to do that? Is that new?
DOCTOR: A sun roof on Saint Paul's? Yes, I'd say that was new.
KATE: There's going to be mass panic. Everyone in London can see that.
(More Cybermen fly out of the dome.)
DOCTOR: Everyone in London just clapped and went whee. Hush, I'm trying to count.
OSGOOD: Eighty seven, I think. OCD.
MISSY: Ninety one. Queen of evil.
KATE: How could Saint Paul's be full of ninety one Cybermen and nobody noticed?
DOCTOR: Dimensional engineering. One space folded inside another. Bigger on the inside. Easy if you're a Time Lord.
OSGOOD: Mostly deploying south, a smaller number east.
DOCTOR: Yep, but one straight up.
OSGOOD: So ninety one isn't a coincidence?
DOCTOR: Of course it isn't.
(He takes Missy's 'phone' from Osgood.)
KATE: Osgood? Ninety one. Explain.
OSGOOD: Ninety one areas of significant population density in the British Isles.
DOCTOR: That's one Cyberman for every city and major town. It's happening everywhere, all over the world, right now.
MISSY: Sweet planet, this. I think I might keep it.
KATE: One Cyberman per city. What could they hope to accomplish?
OSGOOD: Doctor!
(The Cyberman that flew straight up has detonated itself.)
KATE: Has it exploded?
MISSY: More than that. Cybermen don't just blow themselves up for no good reason, dear. They're not human.
DOCTOR: If it's not exploding, what's it doing?
MISSY: Pollinating. Falling like rain into the cracks of the Earth.

[Balcony]

(The Gallifreyan hard drive goes dark. In the Nethersphere, the lights are starting to go out. Seb joins Danny and the Iraqi/Afghani boy.)
SEB: Well, this is a bit exciting!
DANNY: What's happening?
SEB: Well, to cut a long story short, it looks like we might all be going home.
DANNY: Home? From the afterlife?
SEB: Well, when I said afterlife, I was being a tiny bit poetic. And Nethersphere's just a cool name we come up with during a spit-ball.
DANNY: What is this place?
SEB: Well, you have to think of it as a data cloud. You know, for storing data. In this case, it's the storage of recently deceased minds.
DANNY: We're in a cloud?
SEB: A sort of cloud, yeah.
DANNY: And what's happening to it?
SEB: What happens to any cloud when it starts to rain.
DANNY: Are you telling me we're going back? What, back to our bodies?
SEB: And the extra good news is, there's been a bit of an upgrade.

[St Peters Hill]

MISSY: The dead are coming home, Doctor. All shiny and new. In twenty four hours the human race as you know it will cease to exist.
DOCTOR: What are you doing? Explain. Tell me now.
(A soldier fires a dart into Missy's neck and she crumples at the knees.)
MISSY: Oh! That was nice. Must do it again.
DOCTOR: No. No, no, no, no, I need to talk to her! I need her awake.
(The Doctor gets sedated too, but he manages to remove the dart before collapsing. Two soldiers gently lower him to the ground.)
DOCTOR: Argh! No. No, no. Stupid. Stupid! No, no. Argh!
(Osgood kneels over the Doctor. Kate phones in the situation.)
KATE: The first protocol is implemented. We're good to go.
OSGOOD: You just have to let it take you.
(The Doctor pulls her close and whispers in her ear before finally passing out.)
KATE: What did he say?
OSGOOD: He said, guard the graveyards.

[Cemetery]

(Thunder crashes in the black Cyber-cloud hanging over a very neat walled Cemetery. The gates are shut to keep the public out.)
TEENAGE BOY: That's weird. Look at that.
(Rain pours down on the graves and mausoleums.
TEENAGE BOY: How come it's only raining inside the graveyard?

[Chaplet Funeral Home]

(At 21 Wardour Row, in a nod to Dorothea 'Dodo' Chaplet, whom the First Doctor left in Fitzroy Square back in 1966. Water runs down the gutters and rises up from the drains.
Down in the preparation room, an undertaker is watching the television.)
NEWS REPORT: We are being told that these metal men are known as Cybermen, but unlike the accounts we have on file, they now have the ability to fly. Similar reports are coming in from all over the world. Flying Cybermen are here on a global scale. Ministers are telling us
(The man gets down from his high stool and stands in water which is covering the tiled floor. He looks up but the sprinkler system isn't leaking.)
NEWS REPORT: To remain calm. 'These Cybermen don't seem to be attacking us, at least not in any conventional fashion. Eyewitnesses have reported seeing them flying into the sky 
(A drop of water runs up the wall, then something bangs inside one of the refrigeration drawers, and another, as if the recently departed want to get out.)
GRAHAM: Hello? Hello?
(One of the bodies covered by a sheet on a preparation table sits up. A blue light glows through the cloth. It is pulled off, and Graham runs from the Cyberman. It stands, sees its reflection, and stares, then touches its face in wonderment. Finally it goes to the clipboard Graham has left on the desk and rips off the top page, which has Known As Danny Pink written in the corner.)

[Airplane hangar]

(The Tardis is being hoisted into the air to be loaded onto a jet aircraft.) 
MAN: Right. Be careful with it. Be careful. Take your time.
(The Doctor is leaning back on a box trolley with his hands cuffed behind his back. A man gives him another injection. He wakes with a start and stands.)
DOCTOR: Kate? What's with the handcuffs?
KATE: I'm sorry. In the event of an alien incursion on this scale, protocols are in place. Your co-operation is to be ensured and your unreliability assumed. You have a history.
DOCTOR: You don't have a future without me. Do you think your father would've done this?
KATE: We both know he absolutely would.
(Still unconscious Missy is wheeled in on her box trolley.)
KATE: Who is she?
DOCTOR: Long story. Where's Clara?
KATE: Clara Oswald, your assistant?
DOCTOR: My friend. She was with me in Saint Paul's.
KATE: The team's still on site but they've been unable to gain access to the building.
DOCTOR: I want her found and brought here. I need her with me.
KATE: Then give the order. As soon as you're on board Boat One your word is law. Quite literally.
(They go up the steps with the UNIT logo on them to the airplane. The Doctor stops halfway and looks around.)
DOCTOR: You got the Tardis out, though?
KATE: Yes, and Saint Paul's locked down.

[Main cabin]

(Long conference table, chairs, monitors etc.)
DOCTOR: Where are we going? Cloudbase?
KATE: You mean the Valiant?
OSGOOD: Cloudbase was Thunderbirds.
KATE: Too conspicuous. We need your location concealed, not advertised. From now on you're a moving target.
(The Doctor looks at a portrait of Brigadier Sir Alistair Gordon Lethbridge Stewart on the bulkhead.)
DOCTOR: Ah, I see you're bringing Daddy along, too. That's very sweet.
(An Indian Army officer salutes the Doctor.)
AHMED: Sir.
DOCTOR: Oh, don't do that. You look like you're self-concussing, which would explain all of military history, now I think about it.
AHMED: Colonel Ahmed, sir. Privileged to meet you.
DOCTOR: Love your outfit, Colonel Ahmed. Are you in the Scouts? Are you a Man Scout? I didn't know they had those.
(The Doctor walks away to get a hot drink from the sideboard. Osgood walks past Ahmed.)
AHMED: It was Captain Scarlet.
OSGOOD: Sorry?
AHMED: Not Thunderbirds.
OSGOOD: Oh God, so it was,
DOCTOR: My confidence is growing every minute.
(Kate informs the cockpit of their status.)
KATE: The President is on board.
DOCTOR: Mind you, me and Sylvia Anderson, you've never seen a foxtrot like it. Hang on a second. The President? We don't want Americans bobbing around the place. They'll only start praying.
AHMED: Not the President of America, sir. The President of Earth.
(The Doctor sits at the head of the table and puts a large quantity of sugar lumps into his cup of frothy coffee.)
DOCTOR: There isn't one.
AHMED: There is now.
KATE: The incursion protocols have been agreed internationally. In the event of full-scale invasion, an Earth President is inducted immediately, with complete authority over every nation state. There was only one practical candidate.
DOCTOR: That's your answer for everything, isn't it? Vote for an idiot.
KATE: If you say so, Mister President. So long as you're on this plane, you're the Commander in Chief of every army on Earth. Every world leader is currently awaiting your instructions. You are the Chief Executive Officer of the human race. Any questions?
CAPTAIN [OC]: This is your captain speaking. Please prepare for take-off.
(The Doctor looks around, jaw dragging on the floor.)

[Gallery]

(Clara is confronted by three Cybermen.)
CLARA: Well, gentlemen. Where to start? I was born on the planet Gallifrey, in the constellation of Kasterborous. I'm a Time Lord, but my Prydonian privileges were revoked when I stole a time capsule and ran away. Currently pilot a Type 40 Tardis. I've been married four times, all deceased. My children and grandchildren are missing, and I assume, dead. I have a non-Gallifreyan daughter created via genetic transfer. How much more do you need? I'm the Doctor.
CYBER-SKAROSA: This information is not proof. We require proof.
CLARA: How about my name?
CYBER-SKAROSA: Explain.
CLARA: Well, my name isn't Doctor, is it? I don't even really have a doctorate. Well, Glasgow University, but then I accidentally graduated in the wrong century, so technically
CYBER-SKAROSA: This information cannot be confirmed.
(Another Cyberman walks up behind Clara.)
CYBERMAN: You are Clara Oswald.
CLARA: Ah, no. I'm not!
CYBERMAN: Your deception is intended to prolong your life.
CYBER-SKAROSA: Your presence has not been ordered.
CYBERMAN: Correct. You are Clara Oswald.
CLARA: Oh, seriously, this is getting old. Look, there is no Clara Oswald. I invented her. I made her up.
CYBERMAN: Born 23rd November, 1986.
CLARA: Yeah, I chose that date. Always liked it.
CYBERMAN: Father, David James Oswald. Mother, Elena Alison Oswald.
CLARA: Stories. Stories. Stories. I made them up. Look, ask anybody who knows me. I am an incredible liar.
(The Cyberman lowers his head to look her in the eyes.)
CYBERMAN: Correct.
(He knocks her out with a zap from his right hand.)
CYBER-SKAROSA: No order was given.
CYBERMAN: Correct.
CYBER-SKAROSA: You are not under Cyber control.
(The Cyberman blasts Skarosa and the other two into pieces.)
CYBERMAN: Correct.
(We are given a view of a piece of paper in the Cyberman's left hand, with Known As Danny Pink written on it.)

[Cargo hold]

(Converted into Osgood's laboratory. Missy wakes up on her box trolley, next to the Tardis. There are two soldiers behind her. Osgood is working a little way away.)
DOCTOR: Why are you still alive?
MISSY: You saved me.
DOCTOR: I saved Gallifrey.
MISSY: Yes, Gallifrey too, I suppose. There's always collateral damage with you and me. It's our Paris.
DOCTOR: Gallifrey's lost in another dimension.
MISSY: Yes and no.
DOCTOR: Meaning?
MISSY: Yes, it's in another dimension. No, it's not lost.
DOCTOR: You know where it is?
MISSY: Yep! You know the best part about knowing? (sotto) Not telling you.
AHMED [OC]: Mister President, sir, we're ready for you up here.
DOCTOR: Remember all those years when all you wanted to do was to rule the world? On my way.
AHMED [OC]: Thank you, Mister President.
DOCTOR: Piece of cake.
(He goes to see what Osgood is working on.)
OSGOOD: Oh, er, it's her little device thingy. I thought there might be useful information on it. Who is she?
DOCTOR: You'd never believe me if I told you.
OSGOOD: Cos I thought she might be the Master, regenerated into female form? Your childhood friend, responsible for a number of previous incursions.
DOCTOR: That was fairly quick.
OSGOOD: We do have files on all our ex-prime ministers. She wasn't even the worst. Doctor, there's something nobody's talking about.
DOCTOR: Which is?
OSGOOD: The clouds caused by the exploding Cybermen, they haven't dispersed. They're still there. In fact, they've expanded and are covering almost all the land masses. We're all looking at the graveyards. Maybe we should be looking up? What do you think?
DOCTOR: All of time and space?
OSGOOD: Sorry?
DOCTOR: Just something for your bucket list.
(Osgood takes a breath from her asthma inhaler and her eyes sparkle. Meanwhile, Missy is picking her handcuffs.)

[Main cabin]

NEWS REPORT: Localised rain in the cemeteries has resulted in what can only be described as disturbances to the soil. Extraordinary eyewitness accounts are claiming that silver creatures are climbing from the graves.
(Other people, both military and civilian, are also at this briefing.)
KATE: These scenes are being repeated everywhere. Every cemetery, every mortuary, every funeral home, every hospital, the dead are returning to life as Cybermen.
NEWS REPORT: The public are being advised to stay away from all cemeteries.

[Graveyard]

(Clara wakes amongst old headstones, and stands as thunder rumbles overhead. She puts on her coat and walks past graves where the gravel covering is starting to move, pushed from below.)
CLARA: Hello? Hello?
(An urn topples over as a hand is pushed out of the ground. Someone who died in 1748 reaches up to their headstone.)

[Main cabin]

KATE: We've done heat scans of some of the cemeteries and, in each case only a handful of Cybermen have so far emerged. But every individual burial site is active.
AHMED: Active?
DOCTOR: Hatching.
KATE: More are coming. Potentially millions.
AHMED: So the rain caused all that in just a few hours?
DOCTOR: It wasn't rain, Man Scout. It was pollen. Cyber-pollen. Every tiny particle of a Cyberman contains the plans to make another Cyberman. All it has to do is to make a contact with compatible living organic matter and bang! Full conversion. But if they have learned how to convert the dead.
(He looks at the monitor showing Missy down in the Cargo Hold.)
DOCTOR: That's what she was doing. That's what 3W was for. She creates an all-new paranoia among the super-rich about dying. She exploits the wealth and the mortal remains of selected idiots so she can create a whole new race of Cybermen. Cybermen who can recruit corpses. Throw away your guns, Man Scout, it's all over. How can you win a war against an enemy that can weaponise the dead?
(Clara backs away from a Cyberman that is forcing its way out from underneath its monument. Then she sees all the others rising from their graves and stepping out of their mausoleums.)
AHMED: They're not attacking, apart from isolated incidents. They're just wandering about.
DOCTOR: They're newborns. Give them time. Why were you there this morning? Why were you already attacking?
KATE: Been investigating 3W for a while, then we got a tip-off.
AHMED: From a woman with a Scottish accent.
DOCTOR: Can't play to the gallery unless there's a gallery, and here I am.
(Missy sticks her tongue out.)
DOCTOR: Dead bodies don't have minds, of course, but she's been upgrading dying minds to a hard drive for a long time. So she upgrades the hardware, and then she updates the software.
KATE: What do you mean, a long time? How long?
DOCTOR: Well, she must have a Tardis somewhere, so as long as she likes. The past, the future 
KATE: How long, Doctor?
DOCTOR: How long has the human race had a concept of an afterlife? Turns out the afterlife is real, and it's emptying. Every graveyard on planet Earth is about to burst its banks.

[Cargo hold]

(As Boat One flies above the clouds, Missy sings her own version of Mickey by Toni Basil.)
MISSY: (sings) Hey, Missy, you're so fine, you're so fine you blow my mind. Hey, Missy. Hey. (speaks.) Excuse me. Hi. Can I tell you something really important?
OSGOOD: What.
MISSY: (sotto) I have to whisper it. It's, like, so important to everyone on this plane. You'll get in trouble if you don't listen.
OSGOOD: Right. If it was that important, why would you tell us?
MISSY: Well, look at me, I'm bananas. (sotto) Come on. Just a wee bit closer. Just a little closer. (normal) You know, the Doctor will be really impressed if you learn my secret. You can come a bit closer than that. Come on, stop mucking about. Don't be shy. You don't smell half as bad as you think you do.
OSGOOD: There are two armed men directly behind you.
MISSY: (sotto) Yeah, yeah, yeah.
OSGOOD: If you've got something to say, just say it.
MISSY: Ahem.
(Osgood leans in to listen.)
MISSY: (sotto) I'm going to kill you in a minute. I'm not even kidding. You're going to be as dead as a fish on a slab any second now, all floppy and making smells. But don't tell the boys. This is our secret girl plan.
OSGOOD: Why would you bother killing me? I'm not even important.
MISSY: Oh, silly. Why does one pop a balloon? Because you're pretty. You should have a bit more confidence in yourself.
OSGOOD: Okay. Sorry, I've got work to do.
MISSY: All right, fine. You get on. You get that finished. Would a countdown help you focus at all?
OSGOOD: No, that's okay.
MISSY: Ten. Don't be scared yet, cos I'm still in double figures.
OSGOOD: I'm not scared.
MISSY: Nine. Well, no, of course you're not, cos you know you're dying anyway. Eight. Human beings are born dying.Your life spans are hilarious.
OSGOOD: Please be quiet.
MISSY: Seven. You know from the minute you slop out, you're rotting, decaying. The stench of you. Phew. I'm never going to get this place clean. Three.
OSGOOD: Three?
MISSY: I'm accelerating for dramatic effect. Oh! What's that in your pocket?
OSGOOD: There's nothing in my pocket
(Osgood reaches into her lab coat pocket and pulls out a pair of handcuffs.)
MISSY: Oh my giddy aunt. The quiet ones are the worst.
OSGOOD: Well, those aren't mine.
MISSY: Hmm.
(Missy applies red lipstick.)
MISSY: Then they must be mine.
(In the blink of an eye, she has her arm around Osgood's throat, grabbed her thingy from the desk and vaporised the two soldiers.)
MISSY: Say something nice.
OSGOOD: Missy, the Master, whatever you call yourself, I promise, I'm much more useful to you alive.
MISSY: Oh, yeah, that's true. That's definitely true. That is a good point well made. I'm proud of you, sister. But did I mention bananas! Pop.
(Missy vaporises Osgood.)
MISSY: Ah. Thanks for being yummy.
(She steps on Osgood's spectacles, crushing the lenses. Then she uses her bracelet to make the airplane start swerving.)
MISSY: Whoo-oo!

[Main cabin]

KATE: Mister President, you need to get back in your seat.
DOCTOR: I don't like being the president. People keep saluting. I'm never going to salute back.
(The Doctor inhales the fragrance of a lily he has taken from a vase in front of the Brigadier's portrait.)
KATE: Do you know, that was always my dad's big ambition, to get you to salute him just once.
DOCTOR: He should've asked.
KATE: Doctor, what are you looking at?
DOCTOR: The clouds. Still there. So what else have they got?
(A silver face appears at the porthole. 11 Oct 1963 - Nightmare at 20,000 feet Twilight Zone episode starring William Shatner, anyone?)
KATE: Oh, dear Lord!
DOCTOR: There's a Cyberman out there on the fuselage. But on the plus side, it's not turbulence.
(Then he looks at the monitor showing the laboratory.)
DOCTOR: She's out. Who let her out?
AHMED: What's it doing? Where did it go? What can one Cyberman do to a plane?
(It is not just one Cyberman.)

[Cargo hold]

(The Doctor slides down the ladder and discovers Osgood's broken spectacles. Missy comes out from behind the Tardis.)
MISSY: Oh, she was really scared. It's classic. Have you got any more friends I can play with?

[Graveyard]

(Clara picks her way past bewildered newly-risen Cybermen.)
CYBERMEN: Locate hive. Locate hive. Locate hive. Locate hive.  
(She sees one looking straight at her. It's chest disc is dark. Then it turns its back on her. She runs over.)
CLARA: Are you the one that brought me here?
CYBERMAN: Affirmative.
CLARA: So you know who I am, right?
(It turns to face her.)
CYBERMAN: You are not the Doctor.
CLARA: Of course I'm not the Doctor. I was lying to stay alive. But how do I know so much about him?
(The Cyberman is still clutching the piece of paper.)
CYBERMAN: You are his associate.
CLARA: No, I'm not. I'm not his associate. I'm his best friend. Right now, his best friend, anywhere in the universe. Have you got any sort of Cyber-Internet in there because, really, you should look it up. Look up what happens to you if you harm me.
CYBERMAN: Where is the Doctor?
CLARA: What, you think I would give up the Doctor? Don't be daft. I would never, ever, give up the Doctor, because he is my best friend, too. He is the closest person to me in this whole world. He is the man I will always forgive, always trust. The one man I would never, ever lie to.
(The Cyberman points its weapon at her, but its hand shakes so it lowers it and removes its face plate. No surprises for us, just for Clara.)
CLARA: Danny?
(He drops the screwed up paper from the funeral home.)
CYBER-DANNY: Danny Pink is dead. Help me.
CLARA: Oh, my God. Danny
CYBER-DANNY: Help me.
CLARA: Danny, I am so sorry.
CYBER-DANNY: Help me. I need you to do something for me. I can't do it myself.
(He takes the cover off his chest disc.)
CLARA: What is that?
CYBER-DANNY: It's an inhibitor. It's not activated. I need you to switch it on.
CLARA: What does it inhibit?
CYBER-DANNY: Emotion. It deletes emotions. Please. I don't want to feel like this.

[Main cabin]

AHMED: There's more than one.
KATE: What?
AHMED: They're all over the plane. They're pulling it apart!

[Cargo hold]

(Missy is enjoying the rough ride.)
MISSY: Oh, oooh. Ask me.
DOCTOR: Shut up!
MISSY: Ask me! Come on, you know you want to. You want to know what my plan is. You'll be surprised. I've got a gift for you. You know, I've been up and down your timeline, meeting all those silly people who died to keep you alive. And you know what I worked out? What you really need.
DOCTOR: For what?
MISSY: To know that you're just like me!
(The Tardis phone rings.)
MISSY: Oh, and now it begins. Doctor, I do believe you're on call. Miss Oswald expects. Who else but the girl who's got your number? Whoops!
DOCTOR: It was you!
(He remembers answering the phone in The Bells of St John.)
CLARA [memory]: Ah, hello.
DOCTOR 11 [memory]: Where did you get this number?
CLARA [memory]: The woman in the shop wrote it down. It's a helpline, isn't it?
MISSY: (Cockney) Computer helpline, love. That's the one. Best helpline in the universe.
DOCTOR: You put us together.
MISSY: I kept you together.
(Back to Deep Breath.)
CLARA [memory]: Who put that advert in the paper?
DOCTOR [memory]: Who gave you my number?
CLARA [memory]: The woman. The woman in the shop.
DOCTOR [memory]: Then there's a woman out there who's very keen that we stay together.
DOCTOR: Why?
MISSY: Cos she's perfect, innit? The control freak and the man who should never be controlled. You'd go to hell if she asked. And she would. The phone's ringing, Doctor. Can you hear that? Now that is the sound of your chain being yanked. Heel, Doctor! (as Clara) Help me, Doctor. Help me. Help me, Doctor.
(The Doctor answers the phone.)
DOCTOR: Clara?

[Graveyard]

CLARA: Doctor. With Danny.

[Cargo hold]

DOCTOR: Danny's dead, Clara.
CLARA [OC]: Not yet.

[Graveyard]

CLARA: Not quite. But he wants to be.
DOCTOR [OC]: Clara 
(Danny is crying nearby.)

[Cargo hold]

DOCTOR: Clara?

[Graveyard]

CLARA: He's a Cyberman.

[Cargo hold]

CLARA [OC]: Doctor, Danny's a Cyberman.

[Graveyard]

CLARA: And he's crying. Doctor, he feels it. He's crying.

[Main cabin]

(Kate grabs the phone as Cybermen hammer on the portholes.)
KATE: Message to Geneva. Tell them Boat One is going down. We don't anticipate survivors.
(One breaks through and grabs Ahmed around the neck. The decompression alarm sounds, then he is sucked outside.)

[Laboratory]

DOCTOR: Clara, don't do it. Just don't do it!

[Graveyard]

CLARA: It's in his chest. He says it's an inhibitor. It can delete emotion or something.

[Cargo hold]

DOCTOR: I know what it does. If you turn it on

[Graveyard]

DOCTOR [OC]: He'll become a Cyberman.
CLARA: He's already a Cyberman.

[Cargo hold]

DOCTOR: Not yet, he isn't.

[Graveyard]

CLARA: He's hurting because I hurt him and he wants it to stop.
DOCTOR [OC]: Stop the pain and he'll kill you!
CLARA: Look, are you going to help me, because I can't do this alone.

[Cargo hold]

DOCTOR: I'm not going to help you commit suicide.

[Graveyard]

CLARA: Look, the Tardis can home in on this call, right? Either you help me, or you leave me alone.

[Cargo hold]

DOCTOR: Clara? Clara, no  
(But she has thrown the phone away.)

[Graveyard]

(Clara is fiddling inside the chest disc in the gloom.)
CLARA: There's a lot of switches round the edge. I'm just going to try pressing them all.
CYBER-DANNY: Okay.
CLARA: I am so sorry.
CYBER-DANNY: Yeah.

[Cargo hold]

KATE: Doctor! The Cybermen are in. The plane's going down.
MISSY: Oh, great. It's the daughter one. Do you like her? I like her.
(Kate grabs onto a cargo strap as Missy makes the airplane veer sharply. The Doctor grabs another one. Then Missy opens the cargo hatch and Kate is sucked out, screaming.)
KATE: Aaaaaargh!
DOCTOR: Why did you do that? You didn't have to do that!
MISSY: Oh, don't be so selfish. I'm going to miss her, too. In fact, you know what? Just for that, I'm leaving. Boys, blow up this plane and, I don't know, Belgium, yeah? Kill some Belgians. Might as well. They're not even French. Byeeee!
(Missy teleports herself away. The Doctor is hanging on for dear life.)
DOCTOR: Aaah! Aaah!
(The airplane goes KaBOOM!)
DOCTOR: Argh! Argh!
(The Doctor freefalls.)

[Balcony]

(Missy and Seb watch him fall on a holo-screen.)
MISSY: Well, that's very boring. Oh, he's just going to squish. What kind of a way is that to die? That man has no finesse, none.
SEB: Well, it's quite dramatic.
MISSY: You're an AI interface. Kindly delete your opinions, thank you.
(The Doctor reaches into his inside coat pocket.)
SEB: W-w-what's he doing? Is he? Is he? Oh, no! Oh, no, no, no. N-now, that's
(The Doctor aims himself at something below. He breaks through the clouds and the city lights shine beneath him. And up comes the Tardis.)
SEB: Oh! Permission to squeeeee
(Missy deletes Seb. Permanently. The Doctor arrives at the Tardis, holding the key out in front of him. A few moments later the Tardis bounces up through the dark clouds, engines working.)

[Graveyard]

CLARA: Two more to go. Does it feel any different?
CYBER-DANNY: No.
(The Tardis materialises nearby.)
CLARA: Are you sure?
CYBER-DANNY: Yeah.
(The Tardis door opens and shuts.)
DOCTOR: Clara, don't!
(The other Cybermen are standing around, watching.)
CLARA: Help me.
DOCTOR: If you do what you're trying to do, if you succeed, he will snap you.
CLARA: No.
DOCTOR: Then he will step over your broken body and break another and another and another. He will never stop.
CYBER-DANNY: I will not harm her.
DOCTOR: P E. P E. P E.
CYBER-DANNY: Sir.
DOCTOR: I had a friend once. We ran together when I was little. And I thought we were the same. But when we grew up, we weren't. Now, she's trying to tear the world apart, and I can't run fast enough to hold it together. The difference is this.
(The Doctor puts his hand over Danny's chest disc.)
DOCTOR: Pain is a gift. Without the capacity for pain, we can't feel the hurt we inflict.
CYBER-DANNY: Are you telling me seriously, for real, that you can?
DOCTOR: Of course I can.
CYBER-DANNY: Then shame on you, Doctor.
DOCTOR: Yes. Oh, yes.
(The dark clouds rumble overhead.)
DOCTOR: Danny, Danny, I need you to tell me. What are the clouds going to do? What is the plan?
CYBER-DANNY: How would I know?
DOCTOR: You're part of a hive mind now. Presumably that's how you found Clara. Just look.
CYBER-DANNY: I can't see much.
DOCTOR: Look harder.
CYBER-DANNY: Clara, watch this. This is who the Doctor is. Watch the blood-soaked old general in action. I can't see properly, sir, because this needs activating. If you want to know what's coming, you have to switch it on. And didn't all of those beautiful speeches just disappear in the face of a tactical advantage? Sir.
DOCTOR: (sighs) I need to know. I need to know.
CYBER-DANNY: (sotto) Yes. (normal) Yes, you do.
CLARA: Give me the screwdriver.
DOCTOR: No.
CLARA: Just do it, Doctor. Do as you are told.
(The Doctor meets Cyber-Danny's gaze then gives Clara the sonic screwdriver.)
CYBER-DANNY: Typical officer. Got to keep those hands clean.
(The Doctor walks away.)
CLARA: Just point and think, yeah?
DOCTOR: Yes.
CLARA: Okay. I wasn't very good at it, but I did love you.
CYBER-DANNY: I love you too.
CLARA: I'm never going to say that again.
CYBER-DANNY: Me neither.
CLARA: Ready?
CYBER-DANNY: Yeah.
(Clara cries.)
CLARA: I feel like I'm killing you.
CYBER-DANNY: I'm already dead. You're here this time at least.
CLARA: Goodbye, Danny.
CYBER-DANNY: Goodbye, Clara.
(She activates the screwdriver. Danny's face goes blank and he straightens up. Clara turns off the screwdriver and goes to hug him.)
DOCTOR: Clara, no! Step away! He's activating! Clara, step away now! Don't. Danny. Danny, if you can hear me, if you're still there, what are the clouds going to do?
CYBER-DANNY: The rain will fall again. All humanity will die.
DOCTOR: And rise again as Cybermen.
CYBER-DANNY: Correct.
DOCTOR: How do we stop it?
CYBER-DANNY: We cannot be stopped.
(Missy beams herself in as Mary Poppins, floating gently to the ground under her umbrella.)
MISSY: Oh, that was brilliant! Oh, I love the telly here, but did you see that? Oh, Clara, you poor thing. You must feel like death. Let me pop away the pain.
(Missy starts to tap at her thingy. The Doctor grabs it and throws it away.)
DOCTOR: Don't you dare! Don't you think about it!
MISSY: Oh, sorry, hon, I'm just getting a bit carried away. It's your friends, they're so more-ish. Hmm?
(Clara picks up Missy's thingy and returns to Cyber-Danny's manly metal chest.)
MISSY: Oh, stop looking all cross-pants. I'm here to give you a gift. Could you at least try and be excited?
DOCTOR: What gift?
(Missy speaks into her bracelet.)
MISSY: Cyberdears!
(The Cybermen come to attention and play her game of Simon Says.)
MISSY: Look at Mummy! Raise your arms. Lower your arms. Raise your right. Lower your right. Turn on the spot. There are exits at the front and rear of the aircraft. Please follow the lights up the aisle. You see, Doctor? The power to slaughter whole worlds at a time, then make them do a safety briefing. Everyone who ever lived, man, woman and child, is now at my command. An indestructible army to rage across the universe. The more they kill, the more they recruit. Happy birthday. Oh! You didn't know, did you? It's lucky one of us remembers these things. Happy birthday (as Marilyn Monroe) Mister President.
(She puts her control bracelet on the Doctor's wrist then backs away and curtsys.)
CYBERMAN: Doctor.
(The Cybermen bow their heads to him.)
MISSY: Tiny bit pleased? Oh, go on, crack a smile. I want to see if your eyebrows drop off.
DOCTOR: All of this. All of it, just to give me an army?
MISSY: Well, I don't need one, do I? Armies are for people who think they're right. And nobody thinks they're righter than you. Give a good man firepower, and he'll never run out of people to kill.
DOCTOR: I don't want an army!
MISSY: Well, that's the trouble! Yes, you do! You've always wanted one! All those people suffering in the Dalek camps? Now you can save them. All those bad guys winning all the wars? Go and get the good guys back.
DOCTOR: Nobody can have that power.
MISSY: You will, because you don't have a choice. There's only way you can stop these clouds from opening up and killing all your little pets down here. Conquer the universe, Mister President. Show a bad girl how it's done.
(Missy drops a deep curtsy. The Doctor rips the bracelet off.)
DOCTOR: Why are you doing this?
MISSY: I need you to know we're not so different. I need my friend back. Every battle, every war, every invasion. From now on, you decide the outcome. What's the matter, Mister President? Don't you trust yourself?
DOCTOR [memory]: Tell me. Am I a good man?
DANNY [memory]: (saluting) Sir!
RUSTY [memory]: I see into your soul, Doctor. I see hatred.
DOCTOR [memory]: (to Robin Hood) I'm not a hero.
DALEK [memory]: You are a good Dalek.
DOCTOR: Thank you. Thank you so much.
(He kisses Missy gently.)
DOCTOR: I really didn't know. I wasn't sure. You lose sight sometimes. Thank you! I am not a good man! I am not a bad man. I am not a hero. And I'm definitely not a president. And no, I'm not an officer. Do you know what I am? I am an idiot, with a box and a screwdriver. Just passing through, helping out, learning. I don't need an army. I never have, because I've got them. Always them. Because love, it's not an emotion. Love is a promise.
(Cyber-Danny puts his arm around Clara.)
DOCTOR: And he will never hurt her. P E, catch!  
(The control bracelet lands in Cyber-Danny's hand.)
DOCTOR: You didn't notice, did you? While you were doing all your silly orders, while you where showing off, the one soldier not obeying.
MISSY: No, that's wrong. That's impossible.
CYBER-DANNY: The rain will not fall.
(He lets go of Clara and puts on the control bracelet as he walks towards Missy.)
MISSY: Oh? Why won't it?
CYBER-DANNY: The clouds will burn.
MISSY: And who'll burn them?
CYBER-DANNY: I will burn them.
MISSY: How?
CYBER-DANNY: I will burn.
MISSY: One burning Cyberman is hardly going to save the planet.
CYBER-DANNY: Correct.
(He speaks into the bracelet.)
CYBER-DANNY: Attention!
(The Cyber-Army spring to attention.)
CYBER-DANNY: This is not a good day. This is Earth's darkest hour. And look at you miserable lot. We are the Fallen. But today, we shall rise. The army of the dead will save the land of the living. This is not the order of a general, nor the whim of a lunatic.
MISSY: Excuse me?
CYBER-DANNY: This is a promise. The promise of a soldier! (to Clara) You will sleep safe tonight.
(Cyber-Danny ignites his rocket boots and rises from the ground. All the Cybermen do the same. They fly off into the clouds and explode, burning them away and letting the sunshine through. London, New York, the night sky at Sydney clears in a roll of flame.)
CLARA: Well. The clouds have all gone.
DOCTOR: Yes, burned up. Totally burnt. Burnt to nothing. Sorry.
MISSY: Ten zero eleven, zero zero by zero two
DOCTOR: What did you say??
MISSY: The current coordinates of Gallifrey. It's returned to it's original location. Didn't you ever think to look?
DOCTOR: You are lying!
MISSY: We can, we can go together, just you and me. Just like the old days.
DOCTOR: You'd be clapped in irons.
MISSY: If you like.
CLARA: Doctor, I'm assuming you'll remember those coordinates?
(Clara holds out Missy's thingy towards her.)
DOCTOR: No. No, don't you dare. I won't let you.
CLARA: Old friend, is she? If you have ever let this creature live, everything that happened today, is on you. All of it, on you. And you're not going to let her live again.
DOCTOR: Clara, all I'm doing is not letting you kill her. I never said I was letting her live.
CLARA: Really?
DOCTOR: If that's the only thing that will stop you, yes.
(Clara hands over the thingy.)
MISSY: Seriously. Oh, Doctor. To save her soul? But who, my dear, will save yours? Say something nice. Please?
DOCTOR: You win.
MISSY: I know.
(The Doctor prepares to vaporise Missy, but another energy bolt gets there first. It was a Cyberman with a dark chest disc. It points to something lying amongst the gravestones.)
CLARA: Doctor!
(They run to where Kate is lying on the ground.)
DOCTOR: Kate. She's breathing! She's alive! She can't be here.
CLARA: She is.
DOCTOR: She fell out of a plane. The Cyberman must have caught her.
CLARA: Doctor, she's talking about her dad.
DOCTOR: Of course. The Earth's darkest hour and mine. Where else would you be?
(The Doctor salutes the spirit of Brigadier Alistair Gordon Lethbridge Stewart. It acknowledges with a bow of its head then blasts off into the wide blue yonder.)
DOCTOR: (sotto) Thank you.

[Clara's flat]

(Two weeks later. Clara is asleep when she hears a distant voice.)
DANNY [OC]: Clara. Clara.
CLARA: Danny? Danny? Is that you?
(She goes to the front door, where a soft white light is glowing.)
CLARA: Please say it's you.
DANNY [OC]: Clara.
CLARA: The Doctor told me about the bracelet, how it can let Missy travel from one world to the other.
DANNY [OC]: This place is dying now.
CLARA: Yes, but the bracelet can bring you home.
DANNY [OC]: There's only enough power for one trip.
CLARA: Then come on. Hurry up!
DANNY [OC]: Just one trip. One trip, one person.
(A figure starts to come through the light.)
CLARA: Danny!
(It is the boy in the football shirt, the one Danny killed all those years ago.)
DANNY [OC]: You need to find his parents. He died a long time ago.
(The boy takes a deep breath.)
DANNY [OC]: I'm sorry, Clara. (crying) I truly am. I had, I had promises to keep.
(The bracelet falls from the boy's wrist and the energy fizzles out. The white light fades away.)

[Caf]

(Clara is waiting at a table when the door opens. The Doctor sits down opposite her.)
DOCTOR: Hey.
CLARA: Hey.
DOCTOR: I got your message.
CLARA: Two weeks late.
DOCTOR: Not bad.
CLARA: Improving.
DOCTOR: I see you've got news for me.
CLARA: News?
(She is wearing the now defunct bracelet.)
DOCTOR: He figured it out then? P E figured out there was a way home.
CLARA: Yeah. Yeah, he did.
DOCTOR: Oh, good old P E. He'll make a maths teacher yet.
CLARA: Listen, Doctor. There's, there's something that I have to tell you and, er, it's not good news so just, just listen, okay?
DOCTOR: I know.
CLARA: Sorry?
DOCTOR: I know exactly what you've got to tell me.
CLARA: You do?
DOCTOR: You and Danny are together now. That's great. That's how it should be. But the old man and the blue box, that's never going to fit in. So no more flying around. No more lying.
CLARA: Okay, no, that's not exactly
DOCTOR: It's fine.
CLARA: No, it's not fine. It, it really isn't fine.
DOCTOR: I've found Gallifrey.
CLARA: Wow! Oh, my God,
(The Doctor sets the Tardis in flight to 10-0-11-00:02.)
DOCTOR: I entered the coordinates, just like she said. And I found Gallifrey. For once, she wasn't lying.
(The Doctor opens the Tardis door and looks out into the blackness of space. He shuts it again and walks back to the console, then hits it hard, repeatedly, making sparks fly.)
CLARA: So, what are you going to do now?
DOCTOR: Go home.
CLARA: Okay.
DOCTOR: Gallifrey can be a good place. I can help make it that.
CLARA: What, you?
DOCTOR: Shut up!
CLARA: You won't just steal a Tardis and run away?
DOCTOR: No, not this time. Never again.
(Clara looks at the Tardis through the window.)
CLARA: Never again.
DOCTOR: It's a long commute, so, you know, I thought, with you and Danny
CLARA: Yeah. Me and Danny. Me and Danny, we are going to be fine. Don't you worry. You go home. Go home. Go be a king or something.
DOCTOR: Yeah, I might do that.
CLARA: Or queen, you know. Whatever.
DOCTOR: Yeah, queen, that would be good too.
CLARA: Yeah. (big sigh) Tell you what, seeing as it's goodbye, shall we break a habit?
DOCTOR: What? What habit?
CLARA: Hug.
DOCTOR: Why not. Within reason.
(He stands up.)
DOCTOR: Come on, you're on the clock.
CLARA: Fair enough.
(So she stands and puts her arms around his neck, and he slowly puts his arms around her.)
CLARA: Why don't you like hugging, Doctor?
DOCTOR: Never trust a hug. It's just a way to hide your face.
CLARA: Yeah.

[Outside the Tardis]

CLARA: Doctor? Travelling with you made me feel really special. Thank you for that. Thank you for making me feel special.
DOCTOR: Thank you for exactly the same.
(He goes into the Tardis. It dematerialises without anyone paying any attention, and without kicking up any dust like it used to in the old days. Clara walks away. We roll the final credits but then get interrupted at the end of the cast list.)

[Tardis]

(Knocking on the door.)
MAN [OC]: Coo-ee! Hello? Doctor? You know it can't end like that. Hmm? We need to get this sorted and quickly. She's not all right, you know. And neither are you. I'm coming in.
(The door opens to let in a flurry of snowflakes.)
MAN [OC]: Ah, there you are. I knew I'd get round to you eventually. Now, stop gawping, and tell me.
(We see that the speaker is a chunky silver bearded man in red fur trimmed cap and suit, with a pair of gold-rimmed spectacles half way down his nose.)
SANTA: What do you want for Christmas?


[Clara's bedroom]
(It is the day before Christmas in Clara's new home, with staircase and front door. All the decorations are up and that very rare meteorological event for London - snow in December - can be seen through the windows. A crash and a sudden heavy fall of snow past the bedroom window wakes Clara.)
SANTA [OC]: Argh! (Bells jingle) Moron! Numbskull! Elf!
IAN [OC]: That's racist!
SANTA [OC]: Of course it's not racist, you are an elf.
(Clara gets out of bed, puts on a dressing gown and opens the door onto the flat roof between three sides of the roof, and which has a skylight in the middle. She has the only entrance to it from her attic bedroom. There are wrapped presents and small orange fruit scattered all around. Three figures are looking at a sleigh standing on its end against the -) 

[Clara's roof]

SANTA: Chimneys?
IAN: I'm sorry!
SANTA: I'm just checking that you can see these massive chimneys.
IAN: I, er, they, they're hard to miss.
SANTA: Well, as you've clearly demonstrated, Ian.
WOLF: Donner! Donner and Blitzen. Come on down. Down here, boys.
(There are three members of species Rangifer tarandus flying around, bells jingling on their harness, and one has a glowing red nose. This is, of course, impossible.)
WOLF: Good boys, good boys. Good boy. Rudolph?
SANTA: Just, just clear all the tangerines up. Pick 'em up. All of them, Ian.
IAN: You know no one really likes the tangerines, don't you?
(We now see that this is Dan Starkey out from under the Strax makeup.)
SANTA: How dare you! That's my signature gift. That and the walnut.
WOLF: Down here, boys, come on. Come. Rudolph?
(Wolf the elf kindly has his name embroidered on the back of his jacket. Ian looks up from gathering tangerines.)
IAN: Er, sir? We've been seen.
SANTA: Hello.
CLARA: Hello.
WOLF: Hello, ha ha!
IAN: Hello, human.
WOLF: You can't call her human.
IAN: It's not racist. They don't mind.
SANTA: Hush up, both of you. Oh, sorry about this, girl. We are just three passing, perfectly ordinary roof people, doing some emergency roof things. Carry on. Merry Christmas. If, if it is Christmas, I mean. Heh, heh. I don't much care for things like that, myself. Pfft. I mean, Christmas. (laughs)
CLARA: Are you Santa Claus?
SANTA: Me? No. Oh, no. It's ridiculous. Heh, heh. No, no, no.
(But then Clara sees the reindeer fly past behind him.)
WOLF: Rudolph! Rudolph! Down here now!
SANTA: All right, fine, yes. Yes, it's me. Ha! Guilty. How did you recognise me?
WOLF: You know how you grew that beard as a bit of a disguise? People have picked up on it.
CLARA: Okay. No. Hang on. Stop. Shut up. What? Seriously, you, you're Father Christmas. You're real.
SANTA: Of course I'm real.
WOLF: How could he not be real?
SANTA: Huh? How do you think those presents got under the tree every year? By magic?
CLARA: Well, I thought it was my mum and
IAN + WOLF: Mum and Dad?
SANTA: Ho, ho!
IAN: Well, of course it was.
WOLF: I mean, it makes perfect sense.
IAN: Yeah, your mum and dad, one day a year, for no particular reason, just out of the blue, suddenly decide to give you a great, big pile of presents.
(So no one there knows about the tradition of gift giving on Dec 25th, and that Santa Claus is really Sinterklass which is Dutch for Saint Nicholas who had a reputation for secret gift giving, and whose day is 7th Dec. Tut. What is modern education coming to?)
WOLF: No, no, no. Because they love you so much. It's a lovely story, dear.
IAN: Yeah, but it's time to start living in the real world, yeah?
(Santa has got his notebook out.)
SANTA: Okay. Right. Clara Oswald. Mostly favours travel books, science kits, strict ban on hair products. Marginal for the naughty list, '93. Tut, tut, tut. Believer until the age of nine. Why did you stop?
CLARA: Because you're a fairy tale. I grew out of fairy tales.
SANTA: (sighs) Did you, Clara? Did you really?
(The Tardis materialises next to Clara's roof door.)
DOCTOR: Clara, I want you to step inside the Tardis. I don't want you to talk, I want you to do as I ask. Please.
IAN: That was good, with the box.
WOLF: Hmph. Not often we get upstaged on a rooftop. Hmm.
DOCTOR: Yes, I'm really here. I'm back. Now get inside the Tardis.
(Clara obeys silently and shuts the door.)
DOCTOR: I know what this is. I know what's happening, and I know what's at stake.
SANTA: I don't think you do, Doctor. But I promise, before this Christmas Day is done, you will be glad of my help.
DOCTOR: Happy Easter.
(He goes into the Tardis.)
WOLF: Ooh, brutal!
IAN: Cool exit line, though.
SANTA: Be sure to save some room for a tangerine, Doctor.
DOCTOR: Nobody likes the tangerines.

[Tardis]

CLARA: I'm really back here. This is, this is real, yeah?
(The Doctor starts setting coordinates.)
CLARA: Doctor? Talk to me. I never thought I was going to see you again. What is going on out there? What's happening?
(The time rotor starts spinning overhead.)
CLARA: Oh, that noise. Never knew how much I loved it.
DOCTOR: There's something you have to ask yourself, and it's important. Your life may depend on it. Everybody's life. Do you really believe in Santa Claus?
CLARA: Do you know what? Yeah. Right now, here, I think I do.

[Corridor]

(On a massive icesheet, with green aurora borealis shimmering on the horizon, is a cluster of huts and vehicles with caterpillar tracks, and a satellite dish. Inside, a young woman is wearing a headset with a mini-cam and looking very nervous. A woman speaks to her through her earpiece.)
ASHLEY [OC]: You are now twenty feet from the infirmary. In a moment, as soon as you're ready

[Control room]

(They have her on a monitor, and are recording the feed. The place is full of screens and illuminated keyboards, also dangling light bulbs and some easy chairs.)
ASHLEY: We'll disable the security protocols.
(An older Scots woman speaks.)
BELLOWS: Your neural link is good and holding. We stand ready to abort and extract at the first sign of an anomaly.
(The man in charge - Michael Troughton, son of the second Doctor, Patrick, speaks.)
ALBERT: We're going to be with you

[Corridor]

ALBERT [OC]: Every step of the way, Shona.
ASHLEY [OC]: We're all depending on you

[Control room]

ASHLEY: And we know you won't let us down. Shona, I'm opening the door.
(Auto door lock system 036-8514//412 DR07 PURGE.)

[Corridor]

SHONA: I need the toilet!

[Control room]

BELLOWS: No, you don't. We're monitoring your bodily functions.
SHONA [OC]: And how are you monitoring that? Cos that's rude!

[Corridor]

SHONA: That is perverted.

[Control room]

ALBERT: Do you remember my briefing, Shona?

[Corridor]

SHONA: Yeah. Well, no. I remember some of it.

[Control room]

ASHLEY: Some of it?
BELLOWS: How much?

[Corridor]

SHONA: Till he put his hand on my knee.

[Control room]

SHONA [OC]: And then I was just grossing.
ALBERT: It was intended as a comfort.
BELLOWS: For whom?
SHONA [OC]: All I could see was his nose, with all the little hairs coming out of it.

[Corridor]

SHONA: Have you seen those? It's like he's got insects trapped up there, all trying to escape with their wee, wiggly legs.

[Control room]

ASHLEY: Okay. Let's just go through this again.

[Corridor]

ASHLEY [OC]: There are four sleepers inside the infirmary. You're fine, so long as they don't wake up.
BELLOWS [OC]: She's in range.

[Control room]

ASHLEY: Shona, I'm unsealing the infirmary.

[Corridor]

ASHLEY [OC]: From now on, everything you think and feel, everything you see, will be available to them.

[Control room]

ASHLEY: Most of it's fine, like traffic noise when you're sleeping, so long as you don't think about them.

[Corridor]

ASHLEY [OC]: So long as you don't look at them. So don't think about them

[Control room]

ASHLEY: Don't look at them.

[Infirmary]

(Beep and the doors slide open. There are figures on the beds covered in sheets.)
SHONA: I thought there was going to be music.
BELLOWS [OC]: We've got your playlist

[Control room]

BELLOWS: Ready to go.
ASHLEY: Focus on the words of the song, try to remember what comes next.

[Infirmary]

ASHLEY [OC]: That will work like interference.
BELLOWS [OC]: Here comes your earworm.
(That perennial favourite earworm, Merry Christmas Everybody by Slade, starts playing.)

[Control room]

ASHLEY: Keep your eyes on the floor.

[Infirmary]

ASHLEY [OC]: Shut them, where possible.
SLADE: Are you hanging up your stockings on the wall?

[Control room]

ASHLEY: Focus on the music and move forward through the infirmary.
(Shona closes her eyes and moves to the beat.)
SLADE: It's the time that every Santa has a ball. Does he ride a red-nosed reindeer?
(Shona hums and goes into a dance.)
SLADE: Does a ton-up on his sleigh?
SLADE + SHONA: Do the fairies keep him sober for the day?
BELLOWS: Oh, dear Lord, she's not actually
ASHLEY: If dancing works, it works.
ALBERT: This is insane.

[Infirmary]

SLADE + SHONA: So here it is, Merry Christmas, everybody's having fun.

[Control room]

ASHLEY: This is working.

[Infirmary]

SLADE + SHONA: Look to the future now, It's only just begun. Are you waiting for the family to arrive? Are you sure you've got the room to spare inside?
(Warning Exterior door. Low temperature past this point. 01-180-2. The locking wheel starts to turn, then it opens. Shona, who is on her knees playing air guitar, screams.)

[Control room]

ASHLEY: Shona? Shona, what's wrong?

[Infirmary]

SHONA: We've, we've got ghosts!
ASHLEY [OC]: Ghosts?
SHONA: Yeah, yeah. It's a skeleton man and a girl in a nightie.
(The Doctor and Clara enter. Clara has sensibly gained a parka and sheepskin booties. The door closes behind them.)

[Control room]

(They look at the figures on the beds.)
CLARA [on monitor]: Doctor?
SHONA [on monitor]: No, no, no, you're making me think about them.

[Infirmary]

SHONA: Don't make me think about them!
CLARA: What are they?
(The figures start to sit up slowly.)
SHONA: Look. Just don't ask, yeah? And don't look. Don't make me think about them.
(The sheets fall from their faces to reveal blank slimy carapaces. The Doctor scans them with his screwdriver as they get out of bed.)
DOCTOR: Deaf. Blind. How can they see us? How do they even know that we're here?
SHONA: They can only see you, yeah, if you see them. So just, so just don't look, don't even think about them.
DOCTOR: Oh, telepathic. They can home in on their own image in someone else's brain. Third-party perception. Mind piracy. We're being hacked.
CLARA: What does that even mean?
(The Sleepers are all standing.)
DOCTOR: The visual input from your optic nerve is being streamed to their brains. Stop broadcasting. Close your eyes.
(Clara obeys. The images of the alien heads stretch and morph.)
CLARA: They're still coming, aren't they?
DOCTOR: It's because you're still thinking about them. So long as you retain them as an active memory, they can still home in. Think about something else.
CLARA: How?
SHONA: (sings) So here it is, Merry Christmas
CLARA: Why is she singing?
SHONA: Everybody's having fun
DOCTOR: (sotto) She's running interference. She's trying to distract herself. Three hundred and four minus seventeen.
CLARA: Sorry, what?
DOCTOR: Plus twenty. Just do it!
CLARA: Five hundred and seven.
(Ooo, 200 out! Should started with 504, then.)
(A crack like a mucus filled maw open in the carapaces.)
DOCTOR: Minus fourteen, times four.
CLARA: One thousand nine hundred and seventy two.
DOCTOR: Stop being so good at arithmetic.
CLARA: I can't help it!
DOCTOR: Danny Pink! What is Danny Pink up to right now? He's probably flirting with your neighbour or texting women of low moral character.
(After seeing Danny in her mind, Clara opens her eyes and slaps the Doctor's face, hard. The Sleepers, who are now very close to them, close their maws.)
CLARA: (sotto) Don't you dare. Don't you dare say that.
DOCTOR: I was only
CLARA: Danny Pink is dead.
(The Sleepers growl.)
DOCTOR: No, he's not.
CLARA: He's dead.
(The infirmary door opens and the rest of the crew run in with very, very big guns.)
ASHLEY: Go, run, now, now, now!
(The Doctor turns to grab Shona.)
DOCTOR: Come on, quick, quick, quick, come on!
(Something like a glutenous spider drops down on a thread of mucus from the ceiling.)
ALBERT: Here they come!
(Then lots of them.)
DOCTOR: No!
(One heads squarely for the Doctor's face. Cut to exterior, and a big explosion which destroys the exterior door. A tangerine rolls in from the snow, followed by a troop of varicoloured slinkies and toy robots. Rudolph rears up, with Santa on his back, viewed through the hole where the exterior door used to be. Santa dismounts.)
SANTA: Whoa, whoa! Ah! Good boy.
(He walks into the infirmary, followed by Ian with a balloon toy, and Wolf with an air gun.)
SANTA: Well, now. What seems to be the problem? This is the North Pole. We don't want any trouble here.
(Rudolph bellows.)
SANTA: Hey, Rudolph.
(Santa uses his car key fob to 'lock' Rudolph. Beep!)
SANTA: Easy, son. Oi! Sleepy heads! It's Christmas Eve, early to bed.
(Santa claps his hands and the Sleepers return to their beds.)
ASHLEY: Who the hell are you?
DOCTOR: Oh, take a guess. Go on, push the boat out. Tooth Fairy, maybe? Easter Bunny?
IAN: Shut your mouth, wise guy, or you get yours.
WOLF: It's a balloon animal.
IAN: That's a toy gun.
WOLF: Yeah, well, at least it's unsuitable for children under four. Parts small enough to swallow, so watch out.
(Santa sighs.)
SHONA: Now, this is ridiculous. Am I, am I dreaming?
DOCTOR: Oh, very good.
ASHLEY: I need to know exactly who you are, and what's happening here.
(Santa gently points her gun away from his midriff.)
SANTA: Hello, Ashley. Lead scientist on a polar expedition. Oh, that microscope really paid off, didn't it? Now, your mum and dad wanted me to get you a toy one, but sometimes, I take a chance.
ASHLEY: Who are you? Why are you dressed like that?
SANTA: Why do you think?
SHONA: Come on, this is mental. This is totally not happening.
SANTA: I got three words, Shona. Don't make me use 'em.
SHONA: What three words?
SANTA: My. Little. Pony.
SHONA: Shut up, you.
SANTA: Yeah? I've got lots more, babe.
SHONA: I will mark you, Santa.
(Shona makes claws of her hands.)
CLARA: Okay, Doctor, are you going to explain? What is going on?
SANTA: It's an invasion, Miss Oswald.
CLARA: An invasion of, of what, elves?
WOLF: Whoa! That is racist.
IAN: Elfist!
WOLF: Yeah. Which is a bit hypocritical, from someone of your height.
(Wolf is ever so slightly taller than Clara. Santa fetches a large transparent specimen container 16367//KB from his saddlebags.)
SANTA: Huh? You seen them before, Doctor?
DOCTOR: I've heard of them.
SANTA: The Kantrofarri.
DOCTOR: Colloquially known as the Dream Crabs.
SANTA: Yeah. Depending on how many of those are already on Earth, the human race may well have seen its last day. So, are we going to stand about arguing about whether I'm real or not, or are we going to get busy saving Christmas?
IAN: Oh, ho, ho! Santa goes badass!
WOLF: He's giving me the feels.
SANTA: Shut up. That's a, that's a verbal warning. Please, stop it.

[Laboratory]

CLARA: Is it dead?
(The Doctor and Ashley are looking at the Dream Crab in the container.)
DOCTOR: I don't know. Possibly.
ASHLEY: I'm assuming extra-terrestrial.
DOCTOR: Oh, definitely.
ASHLEY: Then how can you have heard of these things?
DOCTOR: Guess.
ASHLEY: Because you're extra-terrestrial, too.
DOCTOR: Do you believe that?

[Control room]

(Shona is interviewing the three newcomers in an alcove. Santa has got a mug of drink. Ian is flicking through his smart phone.)
SHONA: If you are Santa
SANTA: Mmm hmm.
SHONA: What are you doing here?
SANTA: It's the North Pole. And I own it.
IAN: He means the actual pole.
WOLF: It goes right through the middle of the workshop.
IAN: I've got a selfie with it.
WOLF: Show her. Look at Ian.
(Ian holds out the phone with the photo on it.)
SHONA: The North Pole isn't an actual pole.
IAN: Course it is. Look.
SHONA: If it was an actual pole, it would not be stripy.
WOLF: It's got to be stripy.
IAN: Otherwise, you couldn't see it moving round.
WOLF: Mmm. It's actually basic physics.

[Laboratory]

ASHLEY: Why's it called a Dream Crab, for a start?
DOCTOR: Theorise.
ASHLEY: Because it generates a telepathic field.
DOCTOR: And?
ASHLEY: Alters perception.
DOCTOR: Meaning?
ASHLEY: I seem to be doing all the work here.
CLARA: Meaning we can't trust anything that we see or hear.
DOCTOR: Go to the window.
ASHLEY: Why?
DOCTOR: Because it gets worse.
(Ashley looks out at an incongruous blue Police [public call] Box.)
ASHLEY: What is that?
DOCTOR: That's how Clara and I got here.
ASHLEY: In a box?
DOCTOR: Technically, in a telephone kiosk.
ASHLEY: (laughs) How?
DOCTOR: Because it's a spaceship in disguise. You know what the big problem is in telling fantasy and reality apart?
ASHLEY: What?
DOCTOR: They're both ridiculous. 

[Control room]

SHONA: It's Christmas Eve!
SANTA: Yeah. You don't have to tell me that.
SHONA: Yeah, well, then why aren't you out delivering presents?
SANTA: Technically, I am.
SHONA: Well, you're not. You're stood right there.
SANTA: Oh, Shona, grow up, love.
IAN: Yeah, do the math, baby.
(Shona takes notes.)
SANTA: There's not just one Santa delivery team. How could there be? There are five hundred and twenty six million four hundred and three thousand and twelve children all expecting presents before tomorrow morning. So, hmm, that's twenty two million children per hour. It's impossible! Obviously, I've got a second sledge.

[Laboratory]

CLARA: So we don't know what is real and what isn't?
DOCTOR: Exactly.
CLARA: Are we in danger?
DOCTOR: Oh, we are well way past danger, Clara. If I'm right, and I usually am, we're dying.
ASHLEY: Then how do we stay alive?
DOCTOR: I like you. Straight to the point. I want you to show me how you first encountered those creatures, and what happened to those people in the infirmary. I notice you all wear mini-cams, so I assume that there is footage.
ASHLEY: Is it possible I'm about to work with someone who might be a dream?
DOCTOR: If it helps, so am I.
ASHLEY: We have footage on the drives. I'll see what I can pull up.
DOCTOR: Ashley, what's this polar base for? Why are you all here?
ASHLEY: It's a long story.
(Ashley leaves.)
CLARA: What you said about Danny. Unacceptable.
DOCTOR: I know. I had to flood your mind with random emotion.
CLARA: Random?
DOCTOR: You never told me he was dead. You said he made it back.
CLARA: Well, I lied. I lied, so you'd go home to Gallifrey instead of fussing about me.
DOCTOR: I never found Gallifrey. I lied, so you'd stay with Danny.
CLARA: So we're dying, then?
DOCTOR: Yes.
CLARA: Why?
DOCTOR: Oh, complicated.
CLARA: How long do we have?
DOCTOR: No idea.
CLARA: Just. Doctor, give me something to do.
DOCTOR: Trust nothing. Accept nothing you see. Whatever happens, interrogate everything.
CLARA: In case it's a lie.
DOCTOR: In case it's a lie.

[Control room]

SHONA: Reindeer can't fly. They just can't.
SANTA: No. No, they can't. It's a scientific impossibility. That is why I feed mine magic carrots.
DOCTOR: You all right?
SHONA: Yeah. Yeah, yeah. I'm trying to talk sense into er, Beardy-Weirdy.
DOCTOR: You don't seem much like a scientist.
SHONA: That's a bit rude, coming from a magician.
DOCTOR: Why are you out here? What brought you to the North Pole?
SHONA: Long story, isn't it?
DOCTOR: You missed the killer question.
SHONA: Sorry, what?
DOCTOR: Beardy-Weirdy.
SANTA: Yeah?
DOCTOR: How do you get all the presents in the sleigh?
SANTA: It's bigger on the inside.
WOLF: Ooh!
ASHLEY: Doctor?
(Professor Albert is gnawing on a turkey drumstick.)
ALBERT: Sorry. Starving.
DOCTOR: What am I looking at?
(The monitor says Headcam: Carter.)
BELLOWS: Footage from a week ago. A side expedition from our main mission.
DOCTOR: What is your main mission?
BELLOWS: Long story. Ice cave directly beneath this base. Now, look at what we found.
(A cluster of Dream crabs hanging amongst icicles.)
BELLOWS: Dormant at first.
DOCTOR: Until you looked at them too long. Till you thought about them.
BELLOWS: Exactly.
DOCTOR: Sleeping. Probably been down there for centuries.
(Anyone else thinking The Thing meets Alien?)
CLARA: And it wakes up when you think about it?
(The Dream Crab twitches in its container.)
DOCTOR: They can detect their own mental picture in any nearby mind.
ASHLEY: That's Bellows' theory.
BELLOWS: It's like it responds to the presence of any data concerning itself.
DOCTOR: Oh. That was always the legend. You think about a Dream Crab, a Dream Crab is coming for you.
(The Dream Crab twitches the container off the table, and it breaks.)
ALBERT: This is where it gets really nasty.
CLARA: Only now?
(A Dream Crab descends onto the headcam and it goes into static.)
DOCTOR: Okay, then what?
(Bellows switches the image to the infirmary, with them putting the Sleepers into bed. Albert's drumstick is a never-ending feast.)
ALBERT: They're a bit like Facehuggers, aren't they?
DOCTOR: Face huggers?
ALBERT: You know, Alien. The horror movie, Alien.
DOCTOR: There's a horror movie called Alien? That's really offensive. No wonder everyone keeps invading you.
BELLOWS: First, they just slept. Couple of days, just lying there.
DOCTOR: And then they became aggressive.
ASHLEY: If we got close enough, yeah.
DOCTOR: It would take the Dream Crab a little while to take control. Depends how much of the host brain was
ASHLEY: Was what?
DOCTOR: Digested.
ASHLEY: Are they still alive under those things?
DOCTOR: Depends what you call alive.
ASHLEY: Are they suffering?
DOCTOR: No. No, no. no, no, no. The Dream Crab induces a dream state. Keeps you happy and relaxed, in a perfectly realised dream world, as you dissolve. Merciful, I suppose.
ALBERT: Compared to what?
DOCTOR: Compared to that turkey leg you keep eating. Could you rewind for me? I'd like to see them dormant again. Clara, could you fetch me the dead one?
CLARA: Maybe I could fetch you a cup of tea while I'm at it.
DOCTOR: Ooh. Yes, and a punch in the face, too.
CLARA: My very next suggestion.
DOCTOR: Fair enough.

[Laboratory]

(Clara steps on shards of broken glass. She sees that the table is empty.)
CLARA: Doctor?
(She sees part of the broken container on the floor and goes underneath the table to look at it closely. The Dream Crab descends from the ceiling. Clara gasps.)

[Control room]

ASHLEY: What's wrong?
DOCTOR: We're thinking about it. Clara!

[Laboratory]

CLARA: One hundred minus forty two is three hundred and fifty eight times three is one thousand seven hundred and seventy four minus thirty two is one hundred and forty two divided by seven is twenty and, and, and a bit. Think about something else. Think about something else. Danny Pink, Danny, Danny. Danny Pink, I love you.
(The Crab is visible through the slats of the table.)
CLARA: And I'll never see you again, and I'm sorry. I'm sorry I lied. I am sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry
(Mucus falls in a long stream in front of her face, and she screams, then stupidly turns around to look upwards. The Dream Crab breaks the slats apart and drops.)

[Clara's bedroom]

(Clara wakes up in bed. It is full daylight. The door opens and a man in a red nylon fake fur-trimmed suit and false beard enters.)
DANNY: Ho, ho, ho.
CLARA: Who are you?
DANNY: What do you mean, who am I? Who do you think I am?
(He pulls down the long white beard to reveal his short dark one.)
CLARA: Danny?
DANNY: Merry Christmas. Come on!
CLARA: Come on where?
DANNY: Downstairs.
CLARA: Why?
DANNY: Well, you know what day it is.
CLARA: What day is it?
DANNY: Easter. It's Easter Day. That's why I'm dressed like this, I'm Father Easter.
CLARA: Is that a thing?
DANNY: No. Because it's Christmas!
CLARA: Oh. Well, you've made me want chocolate now.
DANNY: Good. Come on. You, out of bed. Downstairs. I have surprises.
CLARA: Tickets for the Indian Orient Express. That painting we saw in Paris, and permission to own a cat.
DANNY: How did you know?
CLARA: Because those are exactly the things I want, and you are too clever ever to be wrong.
DANNY: How do you make you clever into me being clever?
CLARA: I always protect your ego from the truth.
DANNY: Oh, er, thank you for that.
CLARA: It's Christmas.
DANNY: Hurry up, then! 

[Top landing]

(She goes out onto the spacious top landing, turns and sees a blackboard with CLARA!! written on it. Danny is halfway down the stairs already.)
CLARA: Danny? Whose blackboard is that?
DANNY: What blackboard? Are you coming?
CLARA: Yeah, just a moment!
(She turns away for an instant and when she turns back the word has changed to DREAMING!!)
DANNY: Clara.
CLARA: Coming!
(She picks up the blackboard eraser and wipes over the word, turning it to DYING!!)
DANNY: Clara!
CLARA: Yeah. Just a minute.
(She tries rubbing it out again. The word transforms to YOU then ARE then DYING! )
DOCTOR [OC]: You are dying.
(Now the whole landing is lined with blackboards with the word DYING! written on them. The Doctor's voice echoes from a distance.)
DOCTOR [OC]: Dying! Dying! Clara! Clara! Clara!
(She closes her eyes and the scene returns to bright and pleasant.)
DANNY: Well, come on then. You don't know what I'm wearing underneath this Santa outfit.
CLARA: Your pyjamas. You're too shy to wear less than two layers.
DANNY: You could have used your imagination.
CLARA: Yeah, I don't really have to.
(There is now a blackboard at the top of the stairs behind her, saying CLARA!!)
DOCTOR [OC]: Clara!

[Laboratory]

(The Doctor is holding Clara's hand. She is lying on the floor with a Crab over her face.)
DOCTOR: Clara, you're dreaming. You're dying. Can you hear me? Clara?
ASHLEY: We did try to waken the others. No stimulus worked.
DOCTOR: Okay, we kill it. We find a way to kill it and we get it off of her. How do we kill it?
ASHLEY: There's no way to kill it without killing your friend, too. And as a scientist, may I just say, I don't like the way you're talking.
DOCTOR: Santa. In the infirmary, you told the Sleepers to go to bed, and they obeyed you.
SANTA: Sorry, doesn't mean I can get that creature off her.
DOCTOR: No, but you can get back in there unharmed.
SHONA: What? You're asking Santa for help? He doesn't exist.
DOCTOR: And how would you know that? How did you become an expert on what does and doesn't exist?
SANTA: I can commit several million housebreaks in one night dressed in a red suit with jingle bells, so of course I can get back into the infirmary.
DOCTOR: Good. Because there is only one way that I can communicate with Clara.

[Clara's living room]

(Fairy lights are trailed all over the place, and the happy couple are curled up on the corner sofa by firelight. There is a knock on the front door which interrupts a kiss.)
DANNY: Your dad?
CLARA: Going by the timing, I'd say so.
DANNY: Mmm.
CLARA: If you let him anywhere near the subject of golf, I will do a thing, and it will not be a good thing.
DANNY: Um, aren't we giving him golf clubs?
CLARA: And I'm prepared to use them.
(They both chuckle as she gets up and goes to the door.)
DOCTOR: Hi.
CLARA: Hi. Doctor?
DOCTOR: It's not real, Clara. You know it's not real. It's a dream, and it's killing you.
CLARA: Merry Christmas.
(The Doctor closes the door behind him and follows Clara into the living room.)
CLARA: You remember Danny, of course.
DOCTOR: Not as well as you, clearly. You've made him a fraction taller. Merry Christmas, PE.
DANNY: Compliments of the season, sir.
DOCTOR: Dialogue's pretty good, too. Nice work. It's all in the detail.
CLARA: Just stop it.
DOCTOR: He's not real, Clara. None of this is real. What's real is there is an alien organism wrapped around your face, keeping you warm and happy while it eats you.
DANNY: Mince pie, anyone?
DOCTOR: You're dying.
CLARA: If this is a dream, how can you be here? How can we both be having the same dream?
DOCTOR: There was only one way to get to you.
CLARA: And what was that?
DOCTOR: I'm dying, too.

[Laboratory]

(The Doctor is lying next to Clara with a Dream Crab on his face.)
ASHLEY: Have we just killed him? Have we just made it worse?
SANTA: He thinks he can join the dream, and get her out. Have a little faith.

[Clara's living room]

CLARA: You just wake up. Just leave me here, please.
(The Doctor touches her right temple.)
DOCTOR: You have a pain right here. It's like an ice cream pain, but gentle. Do you know what that is? The skin and bone have been parted, probably half an inch, and something has pushed right into the soft tissue of your brain and is very slowly dissolving it. I want you to picture it this way. Somebody has put a straw right through your skull and is drinking you. You should be screaming with agony, but there's anaesthetic. Everything around you right now, even Danny, especially Danny, that's the anaesthetic.
(I now have the picture from Phantasms stuck in my head of Doctor Crusher with a straw stuck into Will Riker's skull. Lovely. Goes really well with the Slade earworm.)
DANNY: Why are you doing this? Why are you saying all of that?
DOCTOR: Because it's true. How long do you think you've been here?
CLARA: All day.
DOCTOR: No. No, no, no. Barely five minutes. Because dream time goes faster. Because this isn't real. Danny isn't real. Danny Pink died saving the world.
DANNY: I really didn't.
DOCTOR: I'm sorry. I thought there was a way back for him, but I was wrong. I can't change that. He's dead.
DANNY: I didn't die saving the world, Doctor, I died saving Clara. The rest of you just got lucky. How long has she got?
DOCTOR: Minutes, till it's irreversible.
DANNY: Well then, get out the way.
(The Doctor moves aside and Danny walks up to Clara.)
DANNY: I'm a dream and you know I am, right? (Clara nods.) Right, one thing. But it's important. It's a very important thing. That is totally how you guessed all of my presents.
CLARA: I miss you.
DANNY: Five minutes.
CLARA: What?
DANNY: You can miss me for five minutes a day. And you'd better do it properly. You'd better be sad. I expect my five. But all the rest of the time, Clara, all the rest of the time, every single second, you just get the hell on with it. Clear?
CLARA: Don't you soldier me.
DANNY: Do as you're told.
DOCTOR: Brave.
DANNY: Dead already. How does she wake up?
DOCTOR: I don't know. Just try. Accept this isn't real, and try.
DANNY: Do it. For me.
CLARA: (crying) When I wake up, you won't be there.
DANNY: Do you know why people get together at Christmas? Because every time they do, it might be the last time. Every Christmas is last Christmas, and this is ours. This was a bonus. This is extra. But now it's time to wake up.
(Danny and Clara kiss.)

[Laboratory]

(The Doctor wakes with a cry and the Dream Crab falls off him. Clara's Dream Crab leaves her face and she coughs.)
DOCTOR: Clara? Clara, look at me, Clara! Clara! Breathe, breathe. Breathe. Breathe.
(The Dream Crabs are on their backs, twitching, then they turn to dust. A little later, they retrieve a piece of carapace and put it in a specimen jar while Shona brushed the remains into a dust pan.)
BELLOWS: So these creatures, when their feeding goes wrong, they die?
DOCTOR: The carnivore's hazard. Food has teeth too. You okay?
(Clara is checking herself in a mirror, looking for the hole in her head.)
CLARA: No.
DOCTOR: Good. There are some things we should never be okay about.
CLARA: There doesn't seem to be a wound.
DOCTOR: No. And the pain's still there, isn't it?
SHONA: Is it the ice cream pain? Just here? Cos I've got that.
BELLOWS: It's the cold, I think. Some sort of reaction.
DOCTOR: But only on one side, just that spot there. Doesn't that strike you as odd?
ALBERT: Well, we've all got it.
CLARA: Okay, so why do we all have that pain?
DOCTOR: Theorise.
CLARA: Don't treat me like a beginner. I was dreaming, then I woke up. I know that.
DOCTOR: Do you? And have you ever woken up from a dream and discovered that you're still dreaming? Dreams within dreams. Dream states nested inside each other. All perfectly possible, especially when we are dealing with creatures who have weaponised our dreams against us.
BELLOWS: I don't know about anybody else, but I'm pretty certain I'm awake right now.
DOCTOR: Which is odd, when you think about it.
ASHLEY: Odd?
DOCTOR: Impossible, in fact. How can any of us be awake?
SHONA: I don't understand.
DOCTOR: Remember how we all first met, in the infirmary?
(The Doctor chivying Shona to move.)
DOCTOR [memory]: Come on, quick, quick, come on.
ASHLEY [memory]: Go! Run, now!
DOCTOR: All those creatures coming down from the ceiling, attacking us.
ALBERT [memory]: Here they come!
(Clara screaming.)
DOCTOR: We never stood a chance. How did we survive that?
SHONA: Well, we, we were rescued.
DOCTOR: Yeah, we were rescued. And who was it that rescued us?

[Control room]

(The man in the red suit is on his mobile phone.)
SANTA: No, no, no, no. I need you to do the east coast right now. Well, otherwise you're going to be delivering to the islands in broad daylight. Yeah, listen. Please try and remember that our mugshots are on every Christmas card. Yeah, just get it done, head towards the northern lights. Yes, I remembered to switch them on.
(Santa walks away.)
DOCTOR: The Helman-Ziegler test. The only reliable dream test that I know. Ah. Your base manual. I take it none of you have memorised this.
SHONA: Oh. I haven't, I haven't read it.
DOCTOR: These books should be identical in the real world. But as they don't exist in your memory, in a dream, they can't be. Agreed? Clara. Give me any two digit number.
CLARA: Fifty seven.
DOCTOR: All right, all of you, turn to page fifty seven and look at the very first word. Right, when I point at you.
ASHLEY: Isotope.
DOCTOR: Well?
BELLOWS: Extremely.
ALBERT: Inside.
SHONA: Chocolate. Why did I get chocolate? What's that about?
ALBERT: This can't be right. We must have got it wrong, that's all.
DOCTOR: Well, we'll do it again. Clara?
CLARA: Twenty four.
DOCTOR: Twenty four.
ASHLEY: We.
BELLOWS: Are.
ALBERT: All.
DOCTOR: Shona?
SHONA: Dead.
ASHLEY: Since the attack in the infirmary, nothing has been real?
DOCTOR: The attack is still going on. This is it!
ALBERT: We've been dreaming since then?
SANTA: Oh, for Easter's sake! Of course you've been dreaming. Haven't you been paying attention?
IAN: Rudolph. Did you see the nose?
WOLF: The North Pole? Come on, with stripes?
IAN: This
WOLF: Is
IAN + WOLF + SANTA: A dream!
SANTA: How much more obvious do you want me to make it? Because I can text the Easter Bunny, you know.
DOCTOR: Seriously? You're trying to help?
SANTA: As you stand here, chatting, chatting, your lives are ending. Unless you wake up, unless you free yourselves from these dreadful creatures, they're, they're going to destroy you.
SHONA: You're a dream who's trying to save us?
SANTA: Shona, sweetheart, I'm Santa Claus. I think you just defined me.
DOCTOR: This makes perfect sense. The Dream Crab tries to make the dream as real as possible to trap you inside it. It creates dreams within dreams so you can never be sure if you are really awake. But your brain knows something is wrong. Your subconscious fights back. This is your mind trying to tell you this isn't real.
SANTA: So it gives you me. Sweet Papa Chrimbo.
IAN: It gives you comedy elves, flying reindeer.
DOCTOR: Exactly.
SANTA: A time-travelling scientist dressed as a magician.
IAN: Classic!
DOCTOR: No. No, no. Hang on. No, no, no, no.
WOLF: Living in a phone box.
DOCTOR: It's a spaceship in disguise.
SANTA: You see how none of this makes any sense?
DOCTOR: Shut up, Santa.
SANTA: I have watched over you all your lives. I've taken care of you from Christmas to Christmas.
BELLOWS: But you're not real.
SANTA: And yet that never stopped me. All of you, come near. Come here, come on. Join hands.
DOCTOR: Look. No. Look, we don't need all this touchy-feely stuff.
SANTA: Shut up, Doctor. Join hands. Come on, concentrate.
BELLOWS: Why?
SANTA: You are deep inside this dream, all right, and it is a shared mental state, so it is drawing power from the multi-consciousness gestalt which has now formed telepathically and
DOCTOR: No. No, No, no, no. Line in the sand. Santa Claus does not do the scientific explanation.
SANTA: All right. As the Doctor might say, (Scottish accent) Oh, it's all a bit dreamy-weamy.
DOCTOR: Why don't you just go and, and make a naughty list?
SANTA: I have, mate, and you're on it.
DOCTOR: Don't give me that. Look, you're supposed to be warm and friendly and cheerful.
SANTA: (Scots) Oh, yeah. Well, look at your great bedside manner.
DOCTOR: Don't be so hostile,
CLARA: Doctor, behave.
ASHLEY: This is very sweet. But right now I have an alien life form wrapped around my face, and apparently it's digesting my brain. When you speak, how do I know it's not the Dream Crab?
SANTA: Ooo, good question. Spoken like a scientist.
CLARA: Can I put it another way? Why would the part of our brain that is trying to keep all of us alive choose you for a face?
SANTA: Is anyone else asking that?
SHONA: Yeah, yeah. Yeah. All of us. All of us. Why you?
SANTA: Why me? It's the North Pole, it's Christmas Day. You're dying. Who you gonna call? Just one last time, huh? One last Christmas, as if your lives depended on it. Please! Ho, ho, ho. Believe in Santa.
(They all shrug and form a circle.)
DOCTOR: I'm not very good with this holdy-hand thing.
CLARA: Tough.
DOCTOR: I will hold Clara's hand, but that's it.
CLARA: Shona, take his hand.
DOCTOR: Oh no, I'm fine, I'm fine. This is very Christmassy, isn't it?
ASHLEY: Okay, so what do we
(Santa, Ian and Wolf have vanished.)
BELLOWS: Where did he go?
DOCTOR: We're waking up. That part of the dream is over. We're on our own now.
ALBERT: Well, then. What do we do?
DOCTOR: That pain in your head. Make it worse. Head towards it.
ASHLEY: So when we wake up, what do we expect?
DOCTOR: Only a few moments will have passed at the most. The attack is still in progress.
SHONA: I'm scared.
DOCTOR: Congratulations. That means you're not an idiot.
CLARA: It's not like the last time.
DOCTOR: Last time wasn't real.
ASHLEY: Good luck. Stay calm. And God bless us, every one.
(Whiteout.)

[Infirmary]

(Dream Crabs fall from the faces of the four scientists, the Doctor and Clara, as the Sleepers clutch their sides and writhe. They all cough violently to clear the mucus as the Dream Crabs twitch and turn to dust.)
DOCTOR: Run!
(One of the Sleepers grabs Clara's arm.)
CLARA: Argh.
DOCTOR: Clara!
CLARA: Doctor!
(It opens its maw and the Doctor pulls her free. She is staring at the pink tube inside the gap.)
DOCTOR: Clara? Come on!
ASHLEY: Out, out, now! NOW!
(They back out with the guns and the doors close.)

[Corridor]

(Bellows hits a stray hand with the butt of her gun until the doors can fully shut.)
DOCTOR: Everyone all right? Good. Bye.
CLARA: Sorry, I'll just go and
(They walk down the corridor.)
DOCTOR: No need for chatting, you'll only get attached. This isn't Facebook.

[Outside the base]

CLARA: Er, what about the Dream Crabs?
DOCTOR: Oh, they're fine.
CLARA: And the people that they're eating?
DOCTOR: Beyond help.
CLARA: Doctor, the others are still in danger.
DOCTOR: Only if they're stupid. There are polar bears on this ice cap. Am I supposed to do something about that, too?
CLARA: We know Dream Crabs are still on Earth.
DOCTOR: There are lots of dangerous things on this funny little planet of yours, Clara, most of which you eat. I'm the Doctor, not your mam.
(He walks to the Tardis.)
CLARA: Doctor? If Santa was only in the dream, why was he on my roof?
DOCTOR: Four. Four patients. Four manuals. Hurry! Do you know what I hate about the obvious?
CLARA: What?
DOCTOR: Missing it.
(They run back inside.)

[Control room]

(On the monitors, the Sleepers are back on their beds.)
DOCTOR: As you were. No saluting. Are you the same people as before?
CLARA: Of course they are.
DOCTOR: Oh, sorry, I deleted you.
SHONA: Well, that's not a very nice attitude, is it?
DOCTOR: Four manuals, yes?
ASHLEY: Yes, why?
DOCTOR: One each.
ALBERT: One each, yes. What's the problem?
DOCTOR: Well, the problem is, you can't see the problem. For instance, you, gobby one.
(He throws a manual to Shona.)
SHONA: I have a name, actually.
DOCTOR: Doesn't matter. I don't need it. When we first met you in the infirmary, what were you doing?
SHONA: Mmm. It's a long story.
DOCTOR: Uptight boss one. (another manual) What is the primary mission of this polar base?
ASHLEY: It's a long story.
DOCTOR: Sexy one. What brings you to the North Pole at your age?
BELLOWS: It's a long (pause) story.
CLARA: Okay, why are they all giving the same answer, because that is a tiny bit freaky.
DOCTOR: If you think that's freaky, try this. We were in the Tardis. Why did we come here?
CLARA: It's a long story.
(The penny drops.)
CLARA: Doctor?
DOCTOR: Dreams. They're funny. Ha, ha, ha. They're disjointed. They're, they're silly. They're full of gaps. But you don't notice, because the dream protects itself. Stops you asking the right questions. For example, why do you have four manuals, one each, when you have a crew of eight? Or did you forget about your friends in the infirmary here?
ALBERT: But we woke up.
DOCTOR: Dreams within dreams, I warned you.
BELLOWS: This isn't a dream. I know it isn't.
DOCTOR: No one knows they're not dreaming. Not one of us. Not ever. Not for one single moment of our lives. Clara? Page number. Make it a good one.
CLARA: Twelve.
(Everyone opens their manual at the number of the Doctor.)
ASHLEY: Very.
ALBERT: Very.
BELLOWS: Very.
SHONA: Dead.
DOCTOR: And who's going to be the first to admit it?
ASHLEY: Admit what?
DOCTOR: That the pain is still there.
SHONA: Actually, I think it's getting worse.
DOCTOR: Yes, there is an alien organism in your brain, eating it. Of course it's getting worse.
CLARA: Doctor? What are they doing?
(On the monitor, the Sleepers are sitting up on their beds.)
DOCTOR: Factually, getting up. Significantly, sensing the endgame.
CLARA: How?
ASHLEY: I don't understand.
DOCTOR: Well, look at them. Go on. Look at them. Look at them properly. Look who they are. They're you. The Sleepers are you.
(Close up of a name badge - Prof Rona Bellows.)
SHONA: How can they be us?
(Shona McCullough)
DOCTOR: Because we're dreaming, all of us. This base isn't real. None of us are actually standing in the room. I'm probably asleep in my Tardis. Clara, you must be in bed. God knows where the rest of you are, probably scattered all over the world. But wherever you are, the Dream Crabs have got us, and we're all being networked into the same nightmare.
BELLOWS: What are they doing?
(The Sleepers are walking towards the cameras.)
DOCTOR: It's your subconscious again. The Sleepers represent the part of your mind that's already surrendered to the attack. These are dream images of what's coming to kill you.
ALBERT: That's me? That's actually me?
DOCTOR: No, it's a metaphorical construct representing a psychic attack within a shared dreamscape. Do please keep up.
ALBERT: But it's me.
DOCTOR: Don't get too close.
(Sleeper Albert puts its hand up to the camera, and Albert leans into the monitor.)
ALBERT: Why?
DOCTOR: Because this is a nightmare.
(Albert gets grabbed by the Sleeper's hand and pulled through the monitor with a scream. The Doctor and Clara try to grab him.)
DOCTOR: No! Clara!
(Ashley and Bellows reach out to their Sleeper images on the screens.)
DOCTOR: Look out, they're coming through. Out! Outside, now! Run, run, run, run! Run! Clara, run. Run, all of you, run. Run!
(The Sleepers are in the control room. The Doctor tries to use a fire extinguisher on them but it doesn't slow them down.)

[Outside the base]

(He bars the door and sonicks the lock. Shona, Ashley and Bellows have acquired duffel coats.)
BELLOWS: We'll freeze to death out here.
SHONA: But it, it's just a dream.
DOCTOR: This dream just killed your friend. Start taking it seriously.
SHONA: Where's Albert? Where's the professor?
DOCTOR: He probably just woke up somewhere in the real world, dead. If we don't wake up now, we'll do the same.
CLARA: But how?
DOCTOR: I don't know.
(The Sleepers thump the door, making fist marks in the thick metal.)
DOCTOR: The Tardis! Come on! Come on!
CLARA: Doctor, it's not the real Tardis.
DOCTOR: Well, let's hope that I dreamed it really well, then.
(The Tardis doors open, and Sleeper Doctor and Sleeper Clara come out.)
CLARA: It's us.
DOCTOR: Of course it's us. We're dreaming too.
SHONA: Oh, my God.
BELLOWS: How is that possible? How can there be so many?
(They are surrounded by dozens of Sleeper versions of themselves.)
DOCTOR: The logic of a nightmare.
(Ashley lights a flare.)
SHONA: So tell us how to wake up. Because you're always talking like you're so clever, going on and on. So tell us what to do!
DOCTOR: We have to leave this place.
SHONA: Leave it?
BELLOWS: How?
DOCTOR: Use your imagination.
BELLOWS: Excuse me?
DOCTOR: Dream yourselves home.
BELLOWS: (panicking) But how?
DOCTOR: Come on, it's Christmas, the North Pole. Who you gonna call?
(Jingle, jingle. They look up to see a bright red light fly across the full moon then swoop down to land.)
SANTA: Hyah! Whoa! Whoa. Ah. Get in the sleigh.
(They do, the Doctor sitting next to Santa and Clara behind him.)
SANTA: Fortunately, I know all your home addresses. Yah!
(Rudolph, Donner and Blitzen pull the sleigh up into the sky.)

[Sleigh]

CLARA: So what happens now?
SANTA: Hyah!
CLARA: This is us just waking up, right?
DOCTOR: Could be. Well, I hope so. Waking up or
CLARA: Or?
DOCTOR: Just focus on this. Do you believe in Santa Claus?
CLARA: I've always believed in Santa Claus. But he looks a little different to me.
(Clara put her arms around the Doctor.)
CLARA: Look!
(She points down at old Father Thames.)
SANTA: Hey. You want to take the reins, Doctor?
DOCTOR: You're a dream construct, currently representing either my recovering or expiring mind.
SANTA: Yes, but do you want a go?
DOCTOR: Yeah. All right.
(The Doctor takes over the reins as they pass St Pauls. Everyone goes ooo!)
DOCTOR: Sorry, sorry, sorry.
(They slalom between roof tops.)
SANTA: Easy! This way.
DOCTOR: No, no, no! Oh, ho ho! Ah!
SANTA: Up a bit. Lift up. There we go.
DOCTOR: Look at me. Look. Look at me!
(They reach the Houses of Parliament as Big Ben chimes midnight. Everyone whoops with excitement as they fly around it they head off north westerly and climb above the cloud layer.)
DOCTOR: Look at me! I'm riding a sleigh. I'm riding a sleigh. Yippee ai-yay!
(They head upwards.)
DOCTOR: Oh. Maybe you could
(He gives the reins back, panting for breath.)
SANTA: Yeah, yeah.
SHONA: I work in a shop.
ASHLEY: I'm sorry?
SHONA: I thought I was a scientist. That's rubbish.
BELLOWS: Finally, something that makes sense.
SHONA: You're horrible, you.
ASHLEY: Perfume.
SHONA: What?
ASHLEY: I'm an account manager for perfume. Does this mean we're waking up?
DOCTOR: Possibly. With any luck, we'll all wake up in our proper times and places.
CLARA: Proper times?
DOCTOR: Well, we could all be from different time zones. Time travel is always possible, in dreams.
SHONA: We might not know each other? Not any of us?
ASHLEY: No, possibly not.
SHONA: Well, you know what we should do? We should swap numbers. We should have a reunion.
ASHLEY: Bellows!

[Bellow's home]

(Bellows wakes up in a bright room with a piano. A young girl comes into the room.)
GIRL: Gran! Dinner's ready.
BELLOWS: Yeah, sorry, I must have dozed off.
(She puts her glasses back on, sees where she is sitting with a bit of disappointment, then wheels herself past the crumbled remains of her Dream Crab on the wooden floor.)

[Sleigh]

SHONA: Er, now I'm pretty sure I can remember my number so, if you memorise it, then you text me, we can go for a curry and
DOCTOR: The chances of you remembering any of this are very slim.
SHONA: Well, don't say that. We'll remember, won't we, Ashley? Ashley?
(Ashley wakes up in bed, with her Dream Crab dying beside her. She leaps out of bed with a scream.)
SHONA: Am I next? Is it me now?
CLARA: Shona, you're going home. You're surviving.
SHONA: Do you want to hang out sometime? We can just hang out.
CLARA: Sure.
SHONA: Santa, can I stay a bit longer?
(Shona has vanished.)

[Shona's flat]

(Shona wakes up on her sofa with the Dream Crab twitching and squealing on the floor before it turns to dust.)
SHONA: Gross!
(She picks up the piece of paper with her Christmas Day Itinerary on it. 1. DVD (Alien) 2. DVD (The thing from another world) 3. Dad comes round. 4. DVD (Miracle on 34th Street.) 5. THRONES marathon. 6. Forgive Dave??? She thinks for a moment, then picks up her marker pen and ticks number 6.)

[Sleigh]

CLARA: It's a pity we have to wake up, really. It's not really something we do every day, is it?
SANTA: No, no. Strictly once a year.
DOCTOR: We stay, we die, Clara.
CLARA: You're always such a downer, Doctor.
(But he has gone.)

[Volcanic ledge]

(The Dream Crab falls off, he sits up coughing in the place where she threw the Tardis keys into the lava. Please don't tell me everything since then has been a dream...)
DOCTOR: Clara!
(He dashes into the Tardis.)

[Sleigh]

SANTA: You really should be waking up too, Clara.
CLARA: Just a little longer.
SANTA: Why?
(Clara rests her head on his shoulder.)
CLARA: Every Christmas is last Christmas.
SANTA: Hyah!
(The sleigh flies in front of the full moon.)

[Clara's bedroom]

(The Tardis materialises outside the house. The Doctor carries a specimen jar into her bedroom, where she is still in bed with a Dream Crab on her face.)
DOCTOR: Oh, Clara. I might have known that you would be the one to sleep in. Okay, I tracked the psychic signal here. I'm pretty sure that I know how to do this now. One of the advantages of actually being awake. So, you just hold still. I've just got to zap the neural centres.
(He does so with his sonic screwdriver.)
DOCTOR: Okay, there you go.
(He pulls the Crab off her face and puts it into specimen jar 16367//K8.)
DOCTOR: The Dream Crabs must have got to me first then found you in my memory. The others were collateral damage. Well, good to see you properly at last. How long has it been? Clara.
(Clara switches on her bedside lamp to reveal her grey hair and wrinkled skin.)
CLARA: Oh, you know. About sixty two years. Doctor, I have missed you very much, you stupid old man.
(She laughs and they hug.)
DOCTOR: I've missed you, too.

[Clara's living room]

DOCTOR: These are Christmas hats, I've seen people use them. You put them on and absolutely anything seems funny.
CLARA: Oh, probably won't work on you.
DOCTOR: Probably not. You want to try?
CLARA: Go on, then.
(He puts the yellow paper crown on Clara and she becomes her younger self.)
CLARA: Can you really see no difference in me?
DOCTOR: Clara Oswald, you will never look any different to me. So, how was it then?
CLARA: How was what?
DOCTOR: The sixty two years that I missed.
CLARA: Oh, how was my life, you mean?
DOCTOR: Is there a Mister Clara?
(We see the old version again.)
CLARA: No. But there were plenty of proposals.
DOCTOR: They all turned you down though?
CLARA: I turned them down. I travelled. I taught in every country in Europe. I learned to fly a plane.
DOCTOR: Regrets?
CLARA: Oh, hundreds. I just wish there were time for a few more.
DOCTOR: Yeah, they're always the best part. Christmas cracker. We should do one. No one ever matched up to Danny, eh?
CLARA: There was one other man, but that would never have worked out.
DOCTOR: Why not?
CLARA: He was impossible.
(The Doctor holds Clara's hand to help her pull the cracker.)
DOCTOR: We should do this every Christmas.
CLARA: Because every Christmas is last Christmas.
(The cracker is pulled.)
DOCTOR: I'm sorry. I was stupid. I should have come back earlier. I wish that I had.
SANTA: Do you, Doctor? How much do you wish that?
DOCTOR: No. I'm not still
SANTA: Wakey, wakey!

[Volcanic ledge]

(Once again the Dream Crab falls off.)
DOCTOR: Clara!

[Clara's bedroom]

(Again the Dream Crab is sonicked, this time from young Clara's face.)
CLARA: Doctor. Am I young?
DOCTOR: No idea.
(He gets a mirror for her to look in.)
DOCTOR: Is that any good?
CLARA: Oh, that's good.
DOCTOR: The Tardis is outside.
CLARA: So?
DOCTOR: So, all of time and all of space is sitting out there. A big blue box. Please, don't even argue.
(Clara thinks about it with a big grin on her face, then gives him her hand and kisses his cheek.)
CLARA: Merry Christmas, Doctor.
DOCTOR: Merry Christmas, Clara Oswald.

[Outside Clara's home]

CLARA: Well, look at you, all happy. That's rare.
DOCTOR: Do you know what's rarer? Second chances. I never get a second chance, so what happened this time? Don't even know who to thank.
(They get into the Tardis and it dematerialises. The change of camera focus reveals a tangerine in the ivy on her window ledge.)

<Back to the episode listing

[The Planet Karn]

(Rocky and dark, as usual. The Doctor is talking with the Head of the Sisterhood last seen in Night of the Doctor. Other sisters are standing around the edge of a large pool holding burning torches.)
OHILA: He has asked to see you. His servants seek you everywhere. Will you go?
DOCTOR: No.
OHILA: Why do you always lie?
DOCTOR: Why do you always assume I'm lying?
OHILA: It saves time. The truth - will you go?
DOCTOR: No.
OHILA: When?
DOCTOR: Soon.
OHILA: Why? Did something happen?
DOCTOR: No.
OHILA: Was it recent?
DOCTOR: Yes.
OHILA: Whatever it was, you owe that creature nothing.
DOCTOR: He and I've known each other a long time.
OHILA: You've been enemies for all of it.
DOCTOR: An enemy's just a friend you don't really know yet. Sorry. What, was that me being cynical again?
OHILA: Aren't we friends, Doctor?
DOCTOR: That's different. I don't like you!
OHILA: (laughs) Which means you can trust me.
DOCTOR: You know who to give that to?
(He gives her a large metal disc with engraving on it.)
DOCTOR: I won't go straight away. I'll hang out for a bit. Probably meditate on a rock somewhere. Get myself ready.
OHILA: You are embarking on an enterprise that will end in your destruction.
DOCTOR: You could say that about being born.
OHILA: Wherever you go, there are people who care enough to find you.
DOCTOR: Look after the universe for me. I've put a lot of work into it.
OHILA: Anyone can hide from an enemy, Doctor. No one from a friend.

The Doctor's Meditation by Stephen Moffatt - released in cinemas outside the UK on 15 Sept 2015

[Doctor's room]

The Meditation Begins

(Hollywood style Arthurian / Robin Hood fanfare as we fly over a lake and into a castle room, where the Doctor is sitting on the floor facing the window, lit by candles. A fire blazes in a hearth to his left. A bearded man dressed in leather armour with an embossed chest piece enters.)
DOCTOR: How many days have I been here?
BORS: About three hours.
DOCTOR: Three hours?
BORS: Well, nearly.
DOCTOR: Maybe Clara's right. She keeps telling me I've got Attention Deficit er something or other.
(He drinks from the same goblet that Paul McGann used in Night of the Doctor. It doesn't taste nice.)
BORS: What is your journey?
DOCTOR: You can't come with me, Bors.
BORS: I'm pledged to your service ever since you saved my life.
DOCTOR: I didn't save your life. You had a splinter.
BORS: Where is it you go, and why must you meditate first?
DOCTOR: Someone I know is very sick. He'll want to see me before (pause) while there's still time.
BORS: An old friend?
DOCTOR: Someone I've known a very long time.
BORS: If there is danger, let me ride at your side.
DOCTOR: You can't help me, not where I'm going. I have to get myself ready. I have to be alone. I have to think. No more distractions.
BORS: As you wish, Sir Doctor.
(He turns to leave. The Doctor takes another drink from the goblet.)
DOCTOR: Urgh. Hang on a minute. (stands up) The water.
BORS: The water, sir?
DOCTOR: I don't like it. I can't meditate properly without decent water.
(He hands the goblet to Bors and walks out. Bors sniffs the liquid.)

[Outside the castle]

(Outside the castle, peasants are following the Doctor with shovels.)
DOCTOR: We're going to dig a well! Right on, er, this spot. There will be excellent water here.
BORS: How'd you know?
DOCTOR: Oh, I'm very good at water.
(Day 5)
DOCTOR: This is definitely a good spot for water.
BORS: But this is the twelfth place you've made us dig.
DOCTOR: Well, twelve is my lucky number.
(Groans from the peasants. Days 8-11.)
DOCTOR: Here. No, here. Look at this grass. This is watery grass. Follow the squelchy.
(Day 12. The deep stone-lined well is complete and the workers exhausted. Bors draws a bucket of water.)
BORS: Well, you've all the water you need now and it is the finest in the land. Your meditation can begin.
DOCTOR: Yes, I suppose it can. Except.
BORS: Except?
DOCTOR: Do you know what this well really needs?
BORS: Nothing. It's perfect.
DOCTOR: A visitor's centre.
(Bors lets the bucket drop back down the well.
Day 17. The Doctor is making coins disappear from his hands whilst sitting in a deck chair by a camp fire and imitating Tommy Cooper, when Bors walks up to him.)
BORS: Everyone has agreed on the plan for the throne room extension, but we're we're not quite sure what you mean by a sun roof.
DOCTOR: Look at this coin. You see it?
BORS: (putting down his armful of scrolls) I see it.
(The Doctor waves his hands about.)
DOCTOR: Where is it now?
BORS: There. (pointing to the correct hand.)
DOCTOR: No, it isn't.
BORS: Yes, it is. I saw it.
DOCTOR: Are you sure? I'm really a very good magician.
BORS: What is it you dread?
DOCTOR: Why would I dread anything?
BORS: You're always making jokes. You never sit still, like you're running in fear of days to come.
DOCTOR: I thought you were an idiot.
BORS: I know. I thought that too.
DOCTOR: Good. I was worried I would have to break it to you

[Doctor's room]

(Day 21 - they climb the stairs to the chamber.)
BORS: Are you sure?
DOCTOR: I've been avoiding it. One last night, then I have to go.
BORS: Do you wish to be alone?
DOCTOR: I have to prepare myself.
BORS: But why? You've never explained.
(The Doctor rearranges the candles.)
DOCTOR: I did something wrong. I let somebody down when I should have been brave enough and strong enough to do better. Tomorrow I pay the price. Tonight, I make myself ready.
(He sits down.)
BORS: Goodbye, Magician. You have widened my mind.
(The Doctor stands and puts his hand on Bors' shoulder.)
DOCTOR: You do realise you're still an idiot.
BORS: Yeah.
DOCTOR: Good. I have to be quiet now. Quiet as the grave.
BORS: I do not believe you are capable of silence.
DOCTOR: Oh? Oh, well, we'll see about that, shall we?
BORS: We shall, Sir Doctor.
(Bors leaves and the Doctor makes chalk marks on the floor whilst muttering to himself.)
DOCTOR: No more distractions. Got to focus. No more distractions. Bors!
(Bors returns.)
DOCTOR: Are you any good with a broadsword?
BORS: Yes.
(The Doctor holds up his spoon.)
DOCTOR: Fancy a friendly?
BORS: Enough, Magician! I do not believe that you will meditate. It is not in your nature. If this is to be your last night here then we shall celebrate. There shall be revels. But first past, tell me your story. Tell me how you came to this place and why now you are compelled to leave it. I will not depart this room until you do so.
DOCTOR: (standing) I suppose I do owe you.
BORS: I have served you loyally, Sir Doctor.
DOCTOR: Yes. Yes, you have.
BORS: Then begin your tale.
DOCTOR: Well, a little while ago, a very long way from here, I was looking for a bookshop. Instead, I found a battlefield. Story of my life. I've seen many battlefields. But this one will be different. This one will be my last.
(Over his memory of sound of machine guns and cries on a muddy battlefield- To Be Continued)

The Magician's Apprentice - the actual episode broadcast 19th Sept 2015

[Battlefield]

SOLDIER: Spread out! Get down!
(Straight in from the previous, three biplane buzz soldiers with quivers on their backs, but it fires laser bolts not bullets. One soldier aims an arrow at one as it flies off, then turns to see a young boy running in the opposite direction, into the smoke. A siren sounds, then another soldier runs up.)
SOLDIER: What's wrong?
KANZO: Was that a child?
(The boy is breathless, but still running.)
KANZO: Hey! You there, stop! Stop running!
(The boy stops.)
KANZO: It's okay. I'm not going to hurt you. Just don't run.
SOLDIER: Kanzo?
KANZO: I'll catch up.
SOLDIER: There are clam drones two miles away.
KANZO: I know. I'll be fine. Just go.
(The soldier runs back.)
KANZO: What are you doing out here, huh? Did you get lost?
(The ground ripples.)
KANZO: Stay still. Stay absolutely still.
(Kanzo gets out a small hand-held scanner.)
KANZO: I'm just scanning the ground. I think we've got company. Do you know what hand mines are?
(The boy nods.)
KANZO: Well, in that case you know you've got to stand absolutely still. Right?
(Another nod.)
KANZO: Have you ever seen a hand mine? (nod) Where?
(He follows the boy's gaze to his own foot, which has a hand from out of the ground clamped around his ankle.)
KANZO: Okay. It's okay. Everything's going to be fine
(Whereupon Kanzo is suddenly pulled underground. Then more hands come out of the mud and turn around. They have eyes in their palms, and stop when they see the boy.)
BOY: Help me! Someone, please! Help me! Help me!
(A sonic screwdriver flies through the air and lands at his feet.)
DOCTOR [OC]: Your chances of survival are about one in a thousand. So here's what you do. You forget the thousand, and you concentrate on the one. Pick it up. I said, pick it up!
(The boy obeys.)
DOCTOR [OC]: I'm straight ahead of you, about fifty feet. Can you see me?
(The smoke clears to reveal the Tardis and the Doctor.)
DOCTOR: The device in your hand is creating an acoustic corridor, so that we can talk. Do you understand?
BOY: Who are you?
DOCTOR: Oh, I'm just a passer-by. I was looking for a bookshop. How do you think I'm doing?
BOY: This isn't a bookshop.
DOCTOR: No, this is a war. A very old one, going by the mix of technology. Which war is this? I get them all muddled up.
BOY: It's just the war.
DOCTOR: Where am I? What planet is this?
BOY: I don't understand.
DOCTOR: Well, neither do I. I try never to understand. It's called an open mind. Now, you have got to make a choice.
BOY: A choice?
DOCTOR: Yes, you have got to decide that you're going to live. Survival is just a choice. Choose it now.
BOY: If I move, they'll get me.
DOCTOR: I told you, you have one chance in a thousand. But one is all you ever need. What's your name? Come on, faith in the future. Introduce yourself! Tell me the name of the boy who isn't going to die today.
BOY: Davros. My name is Davros. Hello? Are you still there? Please, you've got to help me. You said I could survive. You said you'd help me. Help me!

[The Maldovarium]

(A spaceship arrives at a planet, and a figure in a long hooded robe glides and weaves down an alley into the dingy club as if riding a Segway, where the singer is doing his rendition of The Weeping Song by Nick Cave. The customers are aliens of many races.)
SINGER: Father, why are all the women weeping?
(The door is burst open, glass breaks, and the figure hisses at the audience.)
COLONY SARFF: We are Colony Sarff. We bring harm.
(It glides up to an Ood, then past around the floor..)
COLONY SARFF: Where is the Doctor? (looking round) Where is the Doctor?
(The Ood whimpers and other beings back away.)
COLONY SARFF: Where is the Doctor!

[The Shadow Proclamation]

(A city in space. The Architect marches through a marble hall decorated with marble statues.)
SHADOW ARCHITECT: Deploy the under-regiment across both sectors. That number of suicide moons cannot be ignored.
(A Judoon clomps after her.)
SHADOW ARCHITECT: Apparently we have a security breach. I won't ask how you got in here, but I will demand to know your business, Colony Sarff.
COLONY SARFF: Where is the Doctor?
SHADOW ARCHITECT: I've no idea. He's not our concern, and he's certainly not your employer's.
COLONY SARFF: The Doctor is required.
SHADOW ARCHITECT: For what? Colony Sarff, you need to tell me. What does Davros want with the Doctor?
(Sarff turns and leaves.)

[Karn]

(Thunder rumbles in the air. We are in the same location as the Prologue.)
OHILA: Welcome, Colony Sarff. We are the Sisterhood of Karn. If you do not leave our world immediately, we will take your skin.
COLONY SARFF: Where is the Doctor?
OHILA: Where he always is. Right behind you, and one step ahead. Tread carefully when you seek the Doctor, Colony Sarff, or he will be the last thing you find.
COLONY: Davros, creator of the Daleks, dark Lord of Skaro.
OHILA: What of him?
COLONY SARFF: Davros is dying.
OHILA: Davros is ancient. He should have been dust centuries ago.
COLONY SARFF: He has a message for the Doctor.
OHILA: Then you will give it to me.
(Colony Sarff writhes as if trying to change shape or something.)
OHILA: Your powers mean nothing here. Give me the message and leave.
COLONY SARFF: Tell the Doctor, Davros knows. Davros remembers. Tell him he must face Davros one last time.
(Thunder and lightning.)
COLONY SARFF: (leaving) Davros knows. Davros remembers.
(When it is out of sight, Ohila turns round.)
OHILA: Doctor? What have you done?
(The Doctor doesn't meet her eyes. - this must be where the Prologue actually goes.)

[Davros' room]

(Davros is hooked up to a lot of tubes, with his head resting on one hand and a sonic screwdriver in the other.)
DAVROS: Doctor. Doctor. Doctor.
COLONY SARFF: You are dreaming, Lord Davros.
DAVROS: No. I am anticipating.
COLONY SARFF: He cannot be found.
DAVROS: Of course he can. He has a weakness. If you seek the Doctor, first seek his friends.

[Classroom]

(A boy spits his chewing gum into a waste basket held by his teacher.)
RYAN: Will I get it back after school?
CHILDREN: Urgh!
CLARA: How will you know which one's yours?
(General laughter.)
CLARA: Fine, then. Right. Now, where was I? Jane Austen. Amazing writer, brilliant comic observer, and strictly among ourselves, a phenomenal kisser.
(Clara pauses, staring out of the window.)
ALISON: Miss? Miss?
RYAN: Miss?
(Staring at an aeroplane motionless in mid-air.)
ALISON: Is she okay?
(Clara gets a marker pen from her desk and draws a circle on the window pane.)
CLARA: Everybody turn on their phones. News websites and Twitter.
(She opens the window and looks out, then closes it again. The aeroplane is in the same place.)
RYAN: Twitter?
CLARA: Hashtag, #ThePlanesHaveStopped

(Breaking news, several newsreaders over various images of aeroplanes over cities.)
BBC NEWSREADER: Reports are coming in of planes hanging apparently motionless in the sky.
TV NEWSREADER: Footage of passenger jets, which have seemingly come to a complete standstill in mid-air.

[Classroom]

MR DUNLOP: Miss Oswald, a call at the office.
CLARA: Yeah, that would probably be UNIT.
MR DUNLOP: They're telling me you're needed. They were going to put me through to the Prime Minister.
CLARA: Mister Dunlop, sorry. I have to take the rest of the day off owing to a, er, personal crisis.

[Outside the school]

(Running whilst on her mobile phone.)
CLARA: Yes. Yes, yes, yes, I'm coming. No, don't send a helicopter. Think it through.

NEWSREADER [OC]: Attempts at communications with the planes, with pilots, crew, passengers, all have failed.
(Jumble of reports in various major Earth languages while Clara rides her motorbike through the streets.)
NEWSREADER [OC]: Family members with candlelight vigils around the world. Meanwhile, reports are coming in from Caracas, Tel Aviv, Beijing. It seems no corner of the planet is unaffected.
(Clara arrives at the Tower of London.)

[UNIT HQ]

KATE: The planes aren't responding. No, none of them. It's radio silence. I've got to go. Tell the President I'll call him back.
(Clara enters.)
KATE: He's not answering his phone. Have you tried?
CLARA: We don't know enough yet. He doesn't appreciate gossip.
KATE: Gossip?
CLARA: How many planes?
JAC: 4,165 aircraft currently airborne.
KATE: That's a lot of passengers.
CLARA: That's a lot of fuel.
KATE: Oh, dear God. Yes, it is.
CLARA: Okay, so, what could you do with 4,000 flying bombs?
JAC: Ah, well, 439 nuclear power stations currently active.
KATE: What else?
CLARA: I dunno. Er, fault lines. Earthquake, a tsunami?
JAC: Running simulations now.
KATE: So this is an attack?
CLARA: What kind of an attack advertises? Why show somebody what you can do? Why not just do it? What's actually happened to the planes? What are the pilots saying?
KATE: We, we can't contact them.
JAC: The planes haven't stopped. They're actually frozen. Like, frozen in time. Pardon my sci-fi, but this is beyond any human technology.
KATE: Okay, so we need the Doctor.
CLARA: Kate, we can't just phone the Doctor and bleat, he'll go Scottish. Come on. What have we got? What do we know? It's not an attack, it's not an invasion, because, well, that doesn't come with a fair warning. So, somebody needs our attention. Somebody who needs to put a gun to our heads to make us listen. Oh.
KATE: Oh?
MIKE: We've got a message. The Doctor channel.
CLARA: Sorry, what?
KATE: He never uses it. I doubt he remembers it even exists.
CLARA: Then who is it?
MIKE: Decrypting. We're getting text through, I think.
CLARA: Texting? Definitely not the Doctor.
(The computer beeps as it creates the letters on screen.)
TEXT: You so fine.
KATE: Have you got any more?
MIKE: Coming.
TEXT: You blow my mind. Hey Missy, you so fine, you so fine, you blow my mind! Hey Missy!!!
(Okay, confess. You didn't read it, you sang it.)
MISSY [on monitor]: Today, I shall be talking to you out of (suddenly 3D) the square window!
KATE: What the hell was that? How did she do that?
JAC: Dunno. Some sort of psychic projection, or something.
KATE: Oh great, thanks.
MISSY [on monitor]: Okay, cutting to the chase. Not dead, back, big surprise, never mind. I'm in a lovely little square in one of your, oh, I don't know, hot countries. There's a light breeze coming from the east, this coffee is a buzz-monster in my brain, and I'm going to need eight snipers.
KATE: Eight what?
MISSY [on monitor]: Three for each heart, and two for my brain stem. You'll have to switch me off fast, before I can regenerate. How fast can you get here? Ooo, I'll need to arrange you a flight corridor.
(Missy licks her finger before pressing buttons on her controller.)
KATE: Why do you need snipers?
MISSY [monitor]: Because it's the only way she'll feel safe enough to talk to me. Shall we say four o'clock?

[Mediterranean plaza]

(A church bell tolls four times. Missy is the only person at the tables at the bottom of the church steps. UNIT snipers take up their positions on the surrounding rooftops. She looks down and sees six red laser dots dancing on her bosom.)
MISSY: Oh, saucy.
(Then she uses her compact mirror to check that the other two are aiming at her brain stem. Two black cars arrive, and Secret Service types get out, then Clara. The collared doves scatter as she walks over to Missy, who gestures for her to sit.)
MISSY: Go on, then.
(Clara sits opposite Missy, who sips at her espresso.)
MISSY: How's your boyfriend? Still tremendously dead, I expect.
CLARA: Still dead, yeah. How come you're still alive?
MISSY: Death is for other people, dear. Would you like to sit in the shade? I know how you humans burn.
(Missy uses her controller, and the shadow of a jumbo jet moves over them.)
MISSY: Better? I expect you've tried to contact him by now. Well, you should know, I can't find him either. No one can.
CLARA: That happens, now and then.
MISSY: Not like this.
(She puts the etched disc from the Prologue on the table. The one the Doctor gave to Ohila.)
MISSY: It's a confession dial.
CLARA: A what?
MISSY: In your terms, a will. The Last Will and Testament of the Time Lord known as the Doctor, to be delivered, according to ancient tradition, to his closest friend, on the eve of his final day.
(Clara reaches for it, and gets an electric shock.)
MISSY: Ah, ah! What are you doing?
CLARA: You said. I thought.
MISSY: No, no, no, no, no. It was delivered to me.
CLARA: You?
MISSY: Well of course it was sent to me. What have you got to do with it? I'm his friend. You're just
CLARA: I'm just what?
MISSY: See that couple over there?
(A man and a woman walk through with their dog.)
MISSY: You're the puppy.
CLARA: Since when do you care about the Doctor?
MISSY: Since always. Since the Cloister Wars. Since the night he stole the moon and the President's wife. Since he was a little girl. One of those was a lie. Can you guess which one?
CLARA: He's not your friend. You keep trying to kill him.
MISSY: He keeps trying to kill me. It's sort of our texting. We've been at it for ages.
CLARA: Mmm. Must be love.
MISSY: Oh, don't be disgusting. We're Time Lords, not animals. Try, nano-brain, to rise above the reproductive frenzy of your noisy little food chain, and contemplate friendship. A friendship older than your civilisation, and infinitely more complex.
CLARA: So the Doctor is your bezzy mate and I'm supposed to believe that you've turned good?
MISSY: Good?
(Missy uses her controller to disintegrate a Secret Service man.)
SOLDIER [OC]: Man down!
CLARA: (sotto) No!
(Clara get up and goes towards where the man was.)
SOLDIER [OC]: Man down!

[UNIT HQ]

KATE: Don't shoot her. Do not shoot her!

[Mediterranean plaza]

MISSY: By the ring on his finger, he was married, and I, I think I detected some baby leakage on his jacket, so he had a family. No, I've not turned good.
(She shoots another man.)

[UNIT HQ]

KATE: Nobody fire!

[Mediterranean plaza]

MISSY: Ooh, wow, I'm on a roll. Thanks for bringing spares.
CLARA: Stop it. Just stop it. Don't shoot anybody else!
MISSY: Oi, you, sweaty one, on your knees. Let's have a goodbye selfie for your kids.
(The man obeys.)
CLARA: Missy, nobody else!
MISSY: Say something nice.
CLARA: No.
MISSY: I'll kill everyone in this square.
CLARA: Start with me. Then what, hey? You came here for my help.
MISSY: Because the Doctor is in danger.
CLARA: Make me believe you.
MISSY: How?
CLARA: Release the planes.
MISSY: The planes are keeping me alive. I mean, there's one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight naughty little snipers ready to kill me.
CLARA: Yeah. On my command.
(Clara holds up her arm.)
CLARA: Your best friend is in danger. Show me you care. Make me believe.
(Missy uses her controller and waves the aeroplane shadow goodbye. It flies off.)

[UNIT HQ]

JAC: The planes! The planes are all moving again.

[Mediterranean plaza]

MISSY: It's only a basic Time Stop. Parlour trick. Couldn't have done anything with them anyway.
(Clara lowers her hand.)
CLARA: What does it say?
MISSY: What does what say?
CLARA: His confession.
MISSY: It will only open when he's dead.
CLARA: Then it won't open, will it?
MISSY: Question. If the Doctor has one last night to live, if he's certain he's facing the end of his life, where, in all of space and time, would he go?
CLARA: Here.
(Someone somewhere claps. An agent brings a laptop to their table.)
MISSY: Well, yes, Earth, obviously! But where? When?
(Two more claps as Clara works the keyboard.)

[UNIT HQ]

JAC: The algorithm generates probabilities based on crisis points, anomalies, anachronisms, keywords.
KATE: Such as?
JAC: Blue box, Doctor.
(Clara and Missy are on the screen as more people applaud in 1138AD.)
JAC: There we go. San Martino, Troy, multiples for New York,

[Mediterranean plaza]

JAC [OC] And three possible versions of Atlantis. It's easier than you'd think. The Doctor makes a lot of noise and he loves to make an entrance.
(Essex. We are shown Bors, the bearded warrior from Meditation wielding a double-headed axe in an arena as tumblers enter under the portcullis.)

[UNIT HQ]

KATE: But which one is the one? Where is he now?

[Mediterranean plaza]

CLARA: How's a Time Lord supposed to die?
MISSY: Meditation. Repentance and acceptance.
[UNIT HQ]

MISSY [on screen]: Contemplation of the absolute.
CLARA [on screen]: Great, thanks. Change the algorithm. Eliminate the crisis points. Where is the Doctor making the most noise, but there isn't any crisis?

[Mediterranean plaza]

CLARA: (sighs) We're looking for a party.
(Lots of lights go out on the UNIT world map until just one is left - in the UK.)
CLARA: There he is. "Do not go gentle into that good night."
MISSY: You go, girl!
(Missy puts something on Clara's wrist, and they vanish.)

[Castle ramparts]

(Then drop onto castle ramparts. It night time and the place is lit by burning torches.)
MISSY: Whoo, whoo whoo! Mummy, do it again! Vortex manipulators. Yours is slaved to mine. Cheap and nasty time travel.
(The courtyard below has wooden stands around it, filled with the peasants and other castle residents. Bors is waving his axe around. These must be the revels after the Meditation.)
BORS: Face me, Magician! Face me!
MISSY: You probably want to throw up, don't you? Pick a local. According to you, this is where the Doctor is.
CLARA: Okay, how do we find him? How do we know what we're looking for?
MISSY: Anachronisms. The slightest, tiniest
(An electric guitar riff fills the area.)
MISSY: Anachronisms.

[Castle courtyard]

(The Doctor enters the under the portcullis on a tank, playing rock guitar and wearing shades. The crowd love it. Bors lowers his axe in despair. The Doctor finishes the riff and bows to the Lord and Lady as his speakers give feedback. He is wearing checkered trousers and a black frock coat.)
BORS: Dude! What is that?
DOCTOR: You said you wanted an axe fight.
(Some chuckles.)
DOCTOR: Oh, come on. In a few hundred years, that'll be really funny. It's a slow burner.
BORS: A musical instrument is not an axe.
DOCTOR: Yes, and a daffodil is not a broadsword, but I still won the last round!
(The crowd cheers.)
DOCTOR: What do you think of my tank? Don't worry, it isn't loaded.
BORS: I don't like it.
DOCTOR: No, neither do I. I bought it for my fish.
BORS: Your fish?
DOCTOR: I may have ordered online!
(Complete silence.)
DOCTOR: Oh, come on. Fish? Tank? Honestly, this stuff will be hilarious in a very few hundred years. Do please stick around.
CLARA: What's the matter with him? He's never like this.
MISSY: Oh, you really are new, aren't you?
(The Doctor looks up at the ramparts, directly at Clara.)
CLARA: Wait, hang on. Did he just hear that? He doesn't know we're here, does he?
(The Doctor plays the opening of Pretty Woman.)
DOCTOR: Now, you lot. I have been here all day, and it's been a great day!
BORS: You've been here for three weeks.
DOCTOR: Three weeks? It must be nearly bedtime. Well, we've partied.
(Cheers.)
DOCTOR: Yes! I helped you dig a well, with a first-class, child-friendly visitor's centre! I've given you some top-notch maths tuition in a fun but relevant way. And I have also introduced the word "dude" several centuries early. Let me hear you!
ALL: Dude!
DOCTOR: Are you a Renaissance?
ALL: Dude!
DOCTOR: Are you a Medieval?
ALL: Dude!
(He points at a young man in armour.)
DOCTOR: I am a dragon-slaying?
ALL: Dude!
DOCTOR: We are all the young?
ALL: Dudes!
DOCTOR: I like it. But I've got some sad news for you, dudes. Tonight, I'm going to have to leave you.
(Cries of no!)
DOCTOR: But before I do, I'd like you to meet a couple of friends of mine.
(Ahs from the crowd, then applause and cheering. Clara enters the courtyard and waves shyly.)
CLARA: How did you know I was here? Did you see me?
DOCTOR: When do I not see you?
CLARA: What, one face in all of that crowd?
DOCTOR: There was a crowd, too?
CLARA: Wow, we're doing charm as well, now, are we? Which one of us is dying?
(The Doctor suddenly hugs Clara.)
CLARA: Okay. And we're doing hugging now, too. I can't keep up.
DOCTOR: Well, you know what they say. Hugging is a great way to hide your face.
CLARA: Okay, look. I guessed a party, but not like this. What is this? This isn't you.
DOCTOR: I spent all day yesterday in a bow tie, the day before in a long scarf. It's my party, and all of me is invited.
(He riffs Mickie as Missy enters.)
MISSY: What the hell are you up to, man?
DOCTOR: It's the wicked stepmother! Everyone hiss!
(Discordant chord and hisses as Missy bows and flourishes her handkerchief.)
MISSY: Apparently, you think you're going to die tomorrow.
(She holds up the confession disc.)
DOCTOR: Well, I've got some good news about that.
MISSY: Oh, yeah?
DOCTOR: It's still today!
MISSY: Oh, that's very good.
(Guitar wah, wah, wah. Bors starts choking.)
DOCTOR: Bors. Is it a marble again? Did you swallow one of the marbles I gave you? Don't swallow marbles!
(The Doctor pulls a banded snake from around Bors' throat and throws it away. It slithers under the robes of -)
COLONY SARFF: Doctor. Your friends have led me to you. You will come.
DOCTOR: Says you and whose army?
(The segments of Sarff's face turn in different directions, like the coils of a snake. Its robe drops to reveal that it is a giant serpent with lots of small snakes around it. The crowd flee.)
DOCTOR: Nobody dies here. Not one person, not one of my friends, do you understand?
COLONY SARFF: Davros, creator of the Daleks, dark lord of Skaro, is dying.
DOCTOR: So I hear.
COLONY SARFF: He would speak with you again on the last night of his life.
DOCTOR: Then you will harm nobody in this place. Not one person. Are we very, very clear?
(Sarff recoils itself into its humanoid form.)
COLONY SARFF: Are you so dangerous, little man?
DOCTOR: You want to know how dangerous I am? Davros sent you. You know how stupid you are? Huh! You came!
(Sarff hisses.)
DOCTOR: Is that supposed to frighten me? Snake nest in a dress? Now, explain, politely. Davros is my arch-enemy. Why would I want to talk to him?
MISSY: No, wait, hang on a minute. Davros is your arch-enemy now?
DOCTOR: Hush!
MISSY: I'll scratch his eye out.
COLONY SARFF: Davros knows. Davros remembers.
(Sarff holds out the sonic screwdriver then throws it to the ground near the Doctor, who hangs his head.)
CLARA: That's yours.
DOCTOR: Er, it was.
CLARA: Was?
DOCTOR: I don't have a screwdriver any more.
MISSY: Ooo. Never seen that before. Doctor, the look on your face. What is that?
CLARA: Shame. You're ashamed. Doctor? What have you done?
YOUNG DAVROS [memory]: Please, you've got to help me. You said I could survive! You said you'd help me! Help me!
(The Tardis dematerialises from the battlefields of Skaro.
The Doctor goes to Colony Sarff)
DOCTOR: Is your ship in orbit?
MISSY: It's a trap.
COLONY SARFF: Prepare yourself for teleport.
MISSY: Doctor, listen to me. I know traps, traps are my flirting. This is a trap.
DOCTOR: I am prepared.
MISSY: You sent me your confession dial. You threw yourself a three week party. You know what this is.
DOCTOR: Yes. Goodbye. (sotto) Goodbye, Clara.
(He turns around, and one of Sarff's colony of snakes binds the Doctor's wrists behind his back.)
CLARA: We're coming with him. Both of us, her and me.
(Missy and Clara join him and hold their hands behind their backs too.)
DOCTOR: No! No, no, no. Under no circumstances! What are you doing now?
COLONY SARFF: Voting. We are a democracy. It is agreed.
(Snakes already bind Missy and Clara's wrists.)
DOCTOR: No, no, no! I forbid it, no! No! No! No! No!
(They all vanish. Bors comes out of hiding, slack-jawed. Then he goes blank-faced)

[Castle]

(Bors walks into a room and opens a chest, throwing the contents on the floor. Then he pulls back a curtain to reveal the Tardis. When he turns back to us, he has a Dalek eyestalk protruding from his forehead.)
BORS: Inform High Command. It is located. The Tardis is located.
DALEK [OC]: The Tardis will be procured.
DALEKS [OC]: Procure the Tardis. Procure the Tardis. Procure. Procure.

[Sarff's spaceship]

DOCTOR: Davros is the child of war, a war that wouldn't end. A thousand years of fighting, till nobody could remember why. So Davros, he created a new kind of warrior, one that wouldn't bother with that question. A mutant in a tank that would never, ever stop. And they never did.
CLARA: The Daleks?
DOCTOR: How scared must you be to seal every one of your own kind inside a tank? (a pause) Davros made the Daleks, but who made Davros?
(Big whoosh, and stars appear in the front window.)
MISSY: Okay, great. Coming out of hyperspace.
(A squat chess pawn or stupa-shaped spacestation spins nearly.)
DOCTOR: So that's where he ended up.
CLARA: What is that?
DOCTOR: I don't know. A hospital?

[Empty room]

(Missy sings wordlessly. The acoustics are perfect.)
CLARA: How long have we been waiting?   
DOCTOR: Who knows? It's always the way with hospitals.
(The cabin door opens and Sarff glides in.)
COLONY SARFF: You will come. You will stay.
MISSY: Fair enough.
CLARA: Doctor. You sent Missy your confession dial.
DOCTOR: Well, we've known each other a long time. She's one of my own people.
CLARA: My point is, we both saw her die on Earth, ages ago. And obviously you knew that wasn't real. Or worse, hoped it wasn't. Either way, I think you've been lying.
DOCTOR: I'm sorry.
CLARA: Don't apologise. Make it up to me. There, see? Ha. Now you have to come back.
(The Doctor leaves with Sarff.)
DOCTOR: (sotto) Gravity.
MISSY: I know.
(The door closes. Missy does a tap dance.)
CLARA: Gravity?
MISSY: Oh, yeah. You know what's wrong with the gravity in here?
CLARA: No.
MISSY: Nothing. It's perfect. But this is a space station, so the gravity should be artificial, all coppery-smelling round the edges, a tiny bit sexy. (American) But this feels real, man. (normal Scottish) Like a planet.
CLARA: How can you and the Doctor be friends?
MISSY: Why shouldn't we be?
CLARA: You spend all your time fighting.
MISSY: Exactly.
(She throws off the snake that had been binding her wrists. It is dead.)
MISSY: You know what this airlock is? I'll tell you. It's pants.
CLARA: What do you mean?
MISSY: I mean that today might be the day.
CLARA: What day?
MISSY: The day I kill you.
CLARA: What are you doing? Are you opening it?
MISSY: Yeah, course.
CLARA: Missy, we'll get sucked out!
MISSY: You and me together, off we go. Let's make jam!
(Missy blows the airlock and an alarm sounds.)

[Davros' room]

(Colony Sarff enters, followed cautiously by the Doctor.)
DAVROS: Doctor?
(The life support tubes are raised so we can see the wizened old man better.)
DAVROS: Doctor.
DOCTOR: Davros.
DAVROS: I approve of your new face, Doctor. So much more like mine. Colony Sarff, untie our guest's hands.
(Sarff glides past the Doctor's back, taking the snake away with him.)
DAVROS: You may leave us.
(Sarff obeys.)
DAVROS: You came, then.
DOCTOR: Clearly.
DAVROS: Did you suspect a trap?
DOCTOR: I still do.
DAVROS: Then why are you here? Did you miss our conversations?
(Davros painfully throws a switch to start a series of clips on a small wall screen.)
DOCTOR 4 [Genesis of the Daleks]: If you had created a virus in your laboratory
DOCTOR 5 [Resurrection of the Daleks]: I'm not here as your prisoner, Davros...
DOCTOR 7 [Remembrance of the Daleks]: Unimaginable power! Unlimited rice pudding!
DOCTOR 10 [Stolen Earth]: Everything we saw. Everything we lost.
DOCTOR 6 [Revelation of the Daleks]: But did you bother to tell anyone they might be eating their own relatives?
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, yes, okay, you've made your point.
DAVROS: Have I?
DOCTOR 4 [on screen]: If someone who knew the future pointed out a child to you, and told you that that child would grow up totally evil, to be a ruthless dictator who would destroy millions of lives, could you then kill that child?
(The Doctor turns off the recordings.)
DOCTOR: I get the point.
DAVROS: Do you know why you came, Doctor? You have a sense of duty. Of guilt, perhaps. And certainly of shame.
DOCTOR: You flatter me.
DAVROS: Pity. I intended to accuse. I believe that for the ultimate good of the universe, I was right to create the Daleks.
DOCTOR: You were very wrong.
DAVROS: This is the argument we've had since we met.
DOCTOR: It ended in the Time War.
DAVROS: It survived the Time War. But it will end tonight. That is why you are here.
(Alarm sounds.)
DAVROS: It seems your friends have gone exploring.

[Outside the hospital]

(Clara and Missy stand in the open airlock. Missy puts her arm out.)
MISSY: It's warm, isn't it? (a pause) For deep space, anyway.
CLARA: What are you doing?
MISSY: Treading softly.
(She steps out cautiously onto nothing visible.)
CLARA: What, there's a floor?
MISSY: No. No, there's ground. This is the ground.
(Clara steps out as Missy does a little dance.)
MISSY: We're on a planet. And that is not a space station. That is a building. And the rest of the planet, the whole thing, is invisible.
(Clara dances around.)
CLARA: That's ridiculous.
MISSY: Well, yes, of course it is. I mean, how would you ever find your glasses? Or the little girl's room? And what if you kissed an ugly? Unless, when you're part of the atmosphere, you start syncing with the spectrum.
CLARA: Why would anybody hide a whole planet?
MISSY: That would rather depend on the planet, dear.
(The spacestation is revealed to be just one of many similar shaped buildings on a desert planet.)
MISSY: No.

[Davros' room]

DOCTOR: No!

[Planet surface]

MISSY: They've built it again. They've brought it back. No, no. No!
CLARA: What? What is it? Where are we?

[Davros' room]

(The buildings are all visible from the window.)
DOCTOR: Skaro! You've brought me to Skaro.
DAVROS: Where does an old man go to die, but with his children?

[Planet surface]

CLARA: What's Skaro?
MISSY: The beginning. Where it all started. This is the planet of the Daleks!
DALEK: Correct.

[Davros' room]

DOCTOR: (sotto) Clara!
DAVROS: You cannot help her now, Doctor.
(The Doctor thumps on the door.)

[Control room]

(Missy and Clara are brought in.)
CLARA: The Tardis. How did she get here?
DALEK SUPREME: It has been procured.
(The Red Dalek is on a raised dais. A big laser gun is lowered from the ceiling. Other Daleks from other eras mill about, including the old Battle Dalek.)
CLARA: Yeah? Yeah, well, if you're trying to get inside, you can't. Nothing can enter the Tardis.
DALEK SUPREME: The Tardis will not be entered. The Tardis will be destroyed.
CLARA: (chuckles) Yeah, well, good luck, because she's indestructible.
MISSY: Did the Doctor tell you that? Because you should never believe a man about a vehicle.

[Davros' room]

DOCTOR: What are they going to do? Tell me, what?
DAVROS: Who can say? You know what children are like.
MISSY [on screen]: Daleks! Pay attention!
DOCTOR: (sotto) Don't. Just don't.

[Control room / Davros' room]

(Missy's speech is split between live action and on-screen, and I cannot be bothered to type that..)
MISSY: You know what this is? This thing you're about to destroy? I'll tell you! It's the dog's unmentionables. And you know all about those, don't you?
(Missy tickles a Dalek's ball.)
MISSY: This is a Tardis. With this, you can go anywhere, do anything, kill anyone. With this, the Daleks can be more powerful than ever before.
(She climbs up onto a ledge opposite the Tardis and the Daleks all turn to look at her. Clara is trying to edge towards the door.)
MISSY: You just need one thing.
DOCTOR: (sotto) No. Missy, no!
MISSY: Me. You need me. A Time Lady, to show you how it works. With this and with me, everything can be yours. And you can burn it all, for ever and ever and ever. (long pause) Or would you rather just kill me?
(The Daleks turn to their leader.)
DALEK SUPREME: Maximum extermination.
DALEK: Exterminate.
(The Daleks fire. Missy's skeleton is briefly visible before she is completely gone.)

[Davros' room]

DOCTOR: Please! Please, I'm begging you. Please, please. Please, save Clara.
DAVROS: I gave the Daleks life. I do not control them.
(The Daleks all turn to face Clara.)
DOCTOR: (sotto) Oh, Clara. Oh, my Clara.
DAVROS: See how they play with her. See how they toy. They want her to run. They need her to run. Do you feel their need, Doctor? Their blood is screaming kill, kill, kill! Hunter and prey, held in the ecstasy of crisis. Is this not life at its purest?

[Control room]

(Clara runs for the open door.)
DALEK: Exterminate! Exterminate!
(They fire. Clara screams and vanishes.)

[Davros' room]

DOCTOR: Why have I ever let you live?
DAVROS: Compassion, Doctor. It has always been your greatest indulgence. Let this be my final victory. Let me hear you say it, just once. Compassion is wrong.

[Control room]

DALEK SUPREME: Destroy the Tardis!
DALEKS: Destroy! Destroy! Destroy! Destroy! Destroy! Destroy! Destroy! Destroy! Destroy! Destroy! Destroy! (ad infinitum)
(The big laser and the Daleks all fire at the Tardis whilst screaming that word, and the console room then the screen goes white.)

[Battlefield]

(Then the white clears to reveal us back where we started.)
YOUNG DAVROS: Help me! You can't leave me! You promised. You said I had a chance.
(The Tardis door opens. He turns.)
YOUNG DAVROS: Who are you? I don't get it. How did you get there?
DOCTOR: From the future.
YOUNG DAVROS: Are you going to save me?
DOCTOR: I'm going to save my friend the only way I can.
(He takes aim with a Dalek gun.)
DOCTOR: Exterminate!

(Clara is hanging upside down with a rope around her ankles, spinning. Missy is sharpening a stick with a knife.)
MISSY: Consider the Doctor. The Doctor, trapped. The Doctor, alone. You all right there, dear?
CLARA: Where are we? How did we ?
MISSY: Shh, now. Mummy's talking. Okay, I'm going to tell you a story of the Doctor. It's classic. On the run, no Tardis. No friends, no help. In other words, the Doctor, happy. It was a long time ago.
(As she tells her tale, we get a brief black and white glimpse of a figure in a long scarf ducking behind a stone column.)
MISSY: Doesn't matter which face he was wearing, they're all the Doctor to me. So let's give it to the eyebrows.
(The hero of her story is now the current Doctor.)
CLARA: But the Daleks
MISSY: Yes, I'm coming to that.
CLARA: Shouldn't we be, um? I don't want to say dead.
MISSY: Hush! He's travelling by teleporter. Unfortunately, his teleporter is out of power. Also unfortunate, he's being stalked by, oh, say about fifty android assassins? I may be rounding up.
(She checks her sharpened stick.)
MISSY: Ow. Fifty invisible, indestructible android assassins, all exclusively programmed to kill him.
CLARA: Why are you sharpening that stick?
MISSY: Well, I've no idea how long we're going to be stuck out here. Might have to go hunting.
CLARA: So why am I tied up?
MISSY: In case there's nothing to hunt.
(Back to the flashes of black and white Doctor being shot at by lasers and backing down a big stone staircase.)
MISSY: The Doctor, then. Surrounded. Outnumbered. Outgunned. And freeze. Nanoseconds to live. Four, I'd say, being generous. Now, my question is this. How did he survive?
(She prods Clara.)
MISSY: Oh, come on, Clara! You know him. Consider the Doctor.
(Clara's mind's eye sees the Doctor looking at her.)
CLARA: Where did he get that teleport thingy?
MISSY: Oh, good, good. He stole one from an android.
CLARA: So, I'm guessing he uses the same energy as the android weapons, right?
MISSY: Excellent! Not seeing you as sandwiches now.
CLARA: Okay, then. He uses the energy wave from the android weapons to recharge the teleport bracelet and at the exact moment he's supposed to disintegrate,
(The Doctor raises his hands over his head, pointing the sonic screwdriver at the teleporter - just like that poster for Star Wars, A New Hope - to absorb the laser energy and -.)
CLARA: He actually teleports. Hang on, that's how you did it. That's how we escaped the Daleks.
MISSY: I modified the same principle for our vortex manipulators, yes. Blew them off, I'm afraid. But the Doctor, he, he improvised it. He must have got through several thousand calculations in the time it takes to fire up a disintegrator. Seriously, what a swot!
CLARA: So the androids think he's dead and the Doctor escapes.
(The Doctor falls down a hole.)
MISSY: No, he's the Doctor. He fell into a nest of vampire monkeys.
(The green eyes of the screeching monkeys glow in the light of the screwdriver.)
MISSY: But that's another story!
(She lets Clara down very suddenly.)
CLARA: Oh!
MISSY: Why does the Doctor always survive?
CLARA: Because he's clever.
MISSY: Yes, but there's lots of clever dead people. I love killing clever clogs, they make the best faces.
CLARA: Because he always assumes he's going to win. He always knows there's a way to survive. He just has to go and find it.
MISSY: Yes, except this time, he made a will and threw himself a goodbye party. Now, if the Doctor assumes he's going to die, what happens then?
CLARA: We do.
MISSY: He's trapped at the heart of the Dalek empire. He's a prisoner of the creatures who hate him most in the universe. Between us and him is everything the deadliest race in all of history can throw at us. We, on the other hand, have a pointy stick. How do we start?
CLARA: We assume we're going to win.
MISSY: Oh. Pity, really. I was actually quite peckish.
(Missy starts to walk off across the desert.)
CLARA: Can I have a stick too?
MISSY: Make your own stick.

[Davros' room]

DAVROS: It took me so very long to realise it was you, standing at the gates of my beginning. And here you are at the end.
(The Doctor is hunting for something, anything, and finds it on a table of spare parts..)
DAVROS: But this time, I have you at my mercy. Exterminate.
(The Doctor holds a Dalek gun to the back of Davros' head then takes it away again.)
DAVROS: Ancient. Inoperable.
(The gun fails to fire.)
DOCTOR: Genius.
DAVROS: You would threaten a dying man? Have I not suffered enough?
DOCTOR: Get out.
DAVROS: I cannot leave this chamber. It sustains me.
DOCTOR: Get out!

[Control room]

(Alarms sound.)
DALEK: Alert! Alert! The infirmary is breached.
DALEK SUPREME: Protect Davros. Davros must be assisted.
(A red dot is moving on a schematic of the building on the wall screen.)
DALEK: Davros is leaving the infirmary.
DALEK SUPREME: Davros must remain. Davros cannot leave.
DAVROS [OC]: My children! Help me!
DALEK SUPREME: You must return to the infirmary.
DAVROS [OC]: The Doctor is escaping. Find him. Find the Doctor.
DALEK SUPREME: Find the Doctor! Seek, locate, destroy!
(Daleks go flying out over Skaro.) 

[Corridors]

DALEKS: Seek, locate, destroy. Seek, locate.
BATTLE DALEK: Exterminate the Doctor!

[Planet surface]

DALEKS [OC]: Exterminate the Doctor! Exterminate!
CLARA: What's happening?
MISSY: What do you think?
CLARA: He's in the middle of that?
MISSY: Ah, that's what we need.

[Control room]

DAVROS [OC]: Assist me!
DALEK: Davros approaches.
DALEK SUPREME: Admit Davros. Admit the creator.
DAVROS: Help me!
DALEK SUPREME: Assist Davros. Assist.
(A Dalek sees Davros lying on the floor of his room. The control room doors to admit the Doctor in Davros' chair.)
DOCTOR: Admit it. You've all had this exact nightmare.

[Davros' room]

(Davros has no body below the waist.)
DAVROS: Get me Sarff!
COLONY SARFF: I am here.

[Control room]

DOCTOR: So,anyone for dodgems?
DALEK SUPREME: Exterminate!
DALEKS: Exterminate! Exterminate!
(They all fire at the Doctor. White out.)

[Cave]

(Looking down a hole in the ground.)
CLARA: Daleks have sewers?
MISSY: With one significant difference.
CLARA: Being?
MISSY: They're ever so slightly alive.
CLARA: They're what?
MISSY: How much of a drop would you say that is? Can you see the bottom?
CLARA: Too dark. Er, we could chuck a stone down, or something.
MISSY: Oh yeah, good idea.
(She pushes Clara down the hole.)
CLARA: Oh!
(Scream, thud.)
MISSY: Twenty feet.

[Control room]

(The Doctor takes a sip from a white teacup with gold trim.)
DOCTOR: Of course, the real question is, where did I get the cup of tea? Answer? I'm the Doctor. Just accept it.
DALEK SUPREME: You are unharmed.
DOCTOR: Proposition. Davros is an insane, paranoid genius who has survived among several billion trigger-happy mini-tanks for centuries. Conclusion? I'm definitely having his chair.
DALEK SUPREME: You cannot escape, Doctor.
(The Doctor holds up the Dalek gun.)
DOCTOR: I'm guessing his personal forcefield only works in one direction.
DALEK SUPREME: The Doctor does not use weapons.
DOCTOR: Doesn't he? Ah, listen to your little hearts beat!

[Sewers]

(Clara starts to sit up.)
CLARA: Ah
MISSY: Hello.
(Clara grabs the pointed stick.)
MISSY: Oh, poppet. Do you really think you could?
CLARA: First chance I get.
MISSY: You won't survive down here on your own.
CLARA: You won't survive turning your back.
MISSY: Ooo. How exciting.
(Missy turns her back on Clara. Nothing happens.)
MISSY: God, you're dull.
(She spins round and grabs the stick back.)
MISSY: In future, if you're going to take my stick, do me the courtesy of actually killing me. Team work is all about respect.
CLARA: We're not a team.
MISSY: Of course we are. Every miner needs a canary. Now, hush, look around. Bit of a mess, isn't it?
CLARA: You said it was a sewer.
MISSY: Daleks don't generate much in the way of waste.
CLARA: So what is it all, then?
MISSY: Decaying Daleks. Daleks can't die. Genetically hard-wired to keep on living, whatever happens. Well. But they still age, poor loves. Over time, the body breaks down, rots, liquefies. Interestingly, the Dalek word for sewer is the same as their word for graveyard.
(She stabs a piece of organic material and it reacts. The walls are covered in screaming bits of Dalek.)

[Control room]

DOCTOR: Ask me what I want.
DALEK SUPREME: Irrelevant. You will not prevail. You will not succeed.
DOCTOR: I've been at the heart of your empire for forty two minutes, and I own it, and I haven't even got out of my chair. Ask me what I want.
DALEK SUPREME: What do you want?
DOCTOR: Clara Oswald.
(He broadcasts across the planet. They can even hear him in the sewers.)
DOCTOR: I want Clara Oswald, safe, alive, and returned to me immediately. You bring her back. You do that. You do that now. Unharmed. Unhurt. Alive.
DALEK SUPREME: Your associate
DOCTOR: I saw what happened. I was there. And I'm hoping, for all of our sakes, that it was a trick.
DALEK SUPREME: It was not a deception.
DOCTOR: Because if Clara Oswald is really dead, then you'd better be very, very careful how you tell me.

[Sewers]

MISSY: Listen to that. The Doctor without hope.
DOCTOR [OC]: Who's going to tell me?

[Control room]

DOCTOR: Who's going to go first?

[Sewers]

MISSY: Nobody is safe now.
DOCTOR [OC]: All the power Davros had is mine.

[Control room]

DOCTOR: Everything he had, I have.

[Sewers]

DOCTOR [OC]: Who's going to tell me that Clara Oswald is really dead?
MISSY: He'll burn everything. Us too.

[Control room]

DALEK SUPREME: Clara Oswald is not alive.
DAVROS [on screen]: Doctor, this urge for conquest. It is gratifying to see you learn.
DOCTOR: Davros. You're up. Sorry, this seat's taken.
DAVROS [on screen]: Indeed. But not by you.
(Snakes seize and hold the Doctor, covering him completely.)
DAVROS [on screen]: You've met my Head of Personal Security, I think. Colony Sarff. His agents are everywhere.

[Davros' room]

DAVROS: Are you ready?
COLONY SARFF: Of course.
DAVROS: Be subtle, Colony Sarff. Tonight, we entrap a Time Lord.
(Sarff uncoils.)

[Sewers]

CLARA: What is that? A lift?
(A door at the end of the sewer.)
MISSY: What? Never mind the lift. See that thing on the wall?
(A metal circle with a blue dot in the middle, standing proud of the rock.)
CLARA: What about it?
MISSY: Take a look.
CLARA: What is it?
MISSY: Closer.
CLARA: What am I even looking for?
MISSY: Nothing. I'm giving it a good look at you.
DALEK [OC]: Intruder alert! Intruder alert!
(Alarms sound. Missy grabs Clara.)
CLARA: Why the hell did you do that?
MISSY: Ever ring a doorbell and run away?
DALEK [OC]: Humanoid detected in lower level.
(Missy handcuffs Clara to the wall camera unit.)
MISSY: Not this time.
DALEK [OC]: Dalek to Lower Level Thirteen.
CLARA: What the hell did you do that for?
MISSY: We need to trap and kill a Dalek. You're the bait, I'm the hook.
(She removes the cameo brooch from her blouse neck.)
MISSY: Dark star alloy. Goes through armour plating like a knife through people.
CLARA: Missy. Missy. Missy, uncuff me now!
MISSY: It's pretty, though, isn't it? Got it in the olden days on Gallifrey. The Doctor gave it to me when my daughter
(The lift arrives.)
MISSY: Keep it talking. We need to draw it out of the lift.
CLARA: You can't kill a Dalek with a brooch.
(Missy hides near the lift.)
MISSY: Yes, you can. Yes, you can.
DALEK: Humanoid detected. Remain still. Do not move. Scan in progress. Humanoid unauthorised in restricted area.
(It trundles up to Clara.)
DALEK: Sterilisation proceeding.
MISSY: Hey, you! Guess what? I just put a hole in you.
(She pricks the Dalek's 'globes' and steam comes out.)
MISSY: And another and another. And another!
CLARA: What are you doing?
MISSY: Murdering a Dalek. I'm a Time Lady, it's our golf.
DALEK: Damage levels insignificant.
MISSY: Oh, really? I think you're forgetting you're surrounded by a bunch of very old, very angry Daleks.
(The decaying Daleks screech.)
MISSY: (American) You just got yourself a puncture in a bad neighbourhood. Meet the locals? All blind and squelchy and out of their tiny minds, but they can still smell! Nobody hates like a Dalek. Here they come! I think they want to steal your motor.
DALEK: Emergency! Emergency! My vision is impaired.
(Viscous fluid seeps into the Dalek then out of its grill.)
DALEK: Exterminate! Exterminate!
MISSY: Oh, here comes the older generation!
(The Dalek fires at tentacles coming from the walls. Missy uncuffs Clara and they run off.)
MISSY: These young folks today are so tetchy!
DALEK: Emergency! Emergency!
(Explosion.)
MISSY: Wheeeeeee!

[Battleground]

(The smoke clears to reveal we are back where it started, with the boy surrounded by hand mines.)
YOUNG DAVROS: Help me! You can't leave me. You promised. You did! You said I could survive. You said you'd help me. Help me!

[Davros' room]

(The Doctor wakes to see Davros reintegrated with his chair.)
DAVROS: I hope you are grateful. It wasn't easy to procure. And very nearly unique, of course. You should feel privileged. The only other chair on Skaro.
(The Doctor looks round to see he is sitting on an ordinary metal frame chair.)
DAVROS: Don't get up.
DOCTOR: You neither.
(The Doctor crosses to the door.)
DAVROS: The chamber is sealed, and I believe you are not carrying your sonic device.
DOCTOR: I gave it up. Bad memories.
DAVROS: I am dying, Doctor.
DOCTOR: You keep saying that, you keep not dying. Can you give it some welly? Come on.
DAVROS: And it is time for us to conclude our business together.
DOCTOR: We have no business.
(An extra golden loop of cable closes its eyes with a soft hiss.)
DAVROS: We have nothing but. Look again at the cables, Doctor. Understand what they are. What they can do. Just step a little closer.

[Sewers]

(Missy opens the lid of the Dalek and scoops out the remains of the mutant Kaled within it.)
MISSY: Get in.

[Davros' room]

DOCTOR: They don't have much respect for you, do they? Your kids. Have you seen the state of this place? I mean, this is exactly where you dump a smelly old uncle slash family pet slash genius scientist who couldn't even invent legs. Seriously, how do your boys take it when everybody else has got two eyes?
(The Doctor is examining the 'life support' unit.)
DAVROS: You know what it is, of course.
DOCTOR: Oh, yes. It's a hyperspace relay, with some kind of a genetic component.
DAVROS: I am connected to the life force of every Dalek on this planet. It is what has kept me alive. As their hearts beat, so does mine.
DOCTOR: Ooo. Nice. Vampiring off your own creations, just to eke out your days. I'm surprised the Daleks allow it.
DAVROS: Oh, they have no choice. My Daleks are afflicted with a genetic defect.
DOCTOR: What defect?
DAVROS: Respect. Mercy for their father. Design flaws I was unable to eliminate. And now he sees it. Now he understands. The cables, Doctor. Touch them. Imagine, to hold in your hand the heartbeat of every Dalek on Skaro. They send me life. Is it beyond the wit of a Time Lord to send them death? A little work and it could be done.
DOCTOR: Er, why would you be telling me this?
DAVROS: Genocide in a moment. Such slaughter, not in self-defence. Not as a simple act of war. Genocide as a choice. Are you ready, Doctor? So many backs with a single knife.
(The Doctor backs away a little, but Davros takes his hand and guides it towards the cables again.)
DAVROS: Are you ready to be a god?
(The Doctor reaches but does not touch.)
DAVROS: Why do you hesitate? No one would know. Clara Oswald is dead. Is this the conscience of the Doctor, or his shame? The shame that brought you here.
DOCTOR: There's no such thing as the Doctor. I'm just a bloke in a box, telling stories. And I didn't come here because I'm ashamed. A bit of shame never hurt anyone. I came because you're sick and you asked. And because sometimes, on a good day, if I try very hard, I'm not some old Time Lord who ran away. I'm the Doctor.
DAVROS: Compassion then.
DOCTOR: Always.
DAVROS: It grows strong and fierce in you, like a cancer.
DOCTOR: I hope so.
DAVROS: It will kill you in the end.
DOCTOR: I wouldn't die of anything else.
DAVROS: You may rely on it.

[Sewers]

(Clara is inside the Dalek casing, which has its front panels open. Missy is attaching electrodes to her head.)
CLARA: How am I supposed to make it go? Are there pedals?
MISSY: Telepathic control. Open wide.
(Clara opens her mouth wide.)
MISSY: I meant your skull. Never mind
(Beeep! as the electrodes penetrate Clara's skull.)
CLARA: Ow!
MISSY: Shh, shh, now, don't worry.
CLARA: Ow.
MISSY: There's loads of nano-tech repairing any damage as the feed goes in.
CLARA: What about when it comes out?
MISSY: No idea. Nobody knows. Anyway, to control the unit, you just have to think. Novel idea for you, but let's try it. Move forwards.
CLARA: I don't know how to
(She gasps as the Dalek moves forwards.)
MISSY: You see?
CLARA: Oh! How did I do that?
MISSY: Circle right.
CLARA: I can't
(She circles right.)
MISSY: Circle left. There you go. All right, this won't hurt a bit.
(Missy touches a control and the Dalek casing starts to close up around Clara.)
CLARA: Hang on. No, Missy. No, no, no, no! No, Missy. Missy, no, no, no, please don't! Don't, don't, please!
(Clang!)
MISSY: Are you okay?

[Inside the Dalek]

CLARA: Fine, I think.

[Sewers]

DALEK: Fine, I think.
CLARA [in the Dalek]: Okay.
CLARA DALEK: Okay. That's a bit weird.
MISSY: Just a bit. Okay. All right. Shh. Say your name.
CLARA DALEK: Why?
MISSY: Just just say. Just say it.
CLARA [in the Dalek]: Clara.
CLARA DALEK: Dalek.
MISSY: Say it again.
CLARA [in the Dalek]: Clara Oswald.
CLARA DALEK: Dalek. Dalek.
MISSY: One more time.
CLARA [in the Dalek]: I am Clara Oswald! I'm Clara Oswald!
CLARA DALEK: I am a Dalek! I am a Dalek! I am a Dalek! I am a Dalek!
(As Missy laughs, the gun fires.)
MISSY: Whoa! Just don't get emotional. Emotion fires the gun. Okay?
CLARA [in the Dalek]: I don't understand.
CLARA DALEK: I do not understand.
MISSY: Say I love you. Those exact words. Don't ask me why, just say it.
CLARA [in the Dalek]: I love you.
CLARA DALEK: Exterminate.
(Missy laughs.)
MISSY: Say, you are different from me.
CLARA [in the Dalek]: You are different from me.
CLARA DALEK: Exterminate! Exterminate!
MISSY: Say, "Ex-ter-min-ate!"
CLARA [in the Dalek]: Exterminate.
CLARA DALEK: Exterminate!
(Missy laughs, then dodges about as Clara spins the Dalek, firing its gun.)
CLARA DALEK: Exterminate! Exterminate! Exterminate! Exterminate! Exterminate!
MISSY: Cybermen suppress emotion. Daleks channel it through a gun. That's why they keep yelling exterminate. It's how they reload. So, let's go and kill them. Come on.

[Davros' room]

DAVROS: There is a question, Doctor. One I have longed to ask.
DOCTOR: Yeah, well, if you're going to put your hand on my knee, it isn't going to go well.
DAVROS: Why did you leave Gallifrey?
DOCTOR: Well, because I did.
DAVROS: You stole the Tardis, and ran and ran. Why?
DOCTOR: It's a boring place, Gallifrey. I was going out of my mind.
DAVROS: Yet you long to return.
DOCTOR: Ah, well, I'm inconsistent.
DAVROS: But it is always the same lie.
DOCTOR: What lie?
DAVROS: You weren't bored. No one runs the way you have run for so small a reason.
DOCTOR: I do.
DAVROS: No, you don't. Colony Sarff confiscated these items on your arrival.
(Davros goes to a box on a small table.)
DAVROS: A Time Lord confession dial, I believe. Your confession. Tell me. Send me to my grave with this precious knowledge. What is the Doctor's confession?
(Davros reaches for the dial.)
DOCTOR: Don't you dare!
DAVROS: Is it possible I have touched a nerve?
DOCTOR: Some things matter to me, Davros. Not many, but a few. And you don't put your fingers anywhere near them.
(The Doctor retrieves his sunglasses from the box.)
DOCTOR: And they'd better not be scratched. These are my best ones.
DAVROS: Still you play the fool.
(The Doctor dons his shades.)
DOCTOR: Well, by now that should make you nervous.

[Corridor]

DALEK: Halt! Report.
(Missy raises her hands.)
CLARA [in the Dalek]: Humanoid intrud
CLARA DALEK: Humanoid intruder found on lower levels.
DALEK: Why has the intruder not been exterminated? Explain. Explain. Explain!
MISSY: I'm a prisoner of special significance. Count the hearts.
DALEK: You are a Time Lord?
MISSY: Time Lady, thank you. Some of us can afford the upgrade. Is it still the same old Supreme Dalek these days? I fought him once on the slopes of the Never Vault. Tell him the bitch is back.

[Davros' room]

(The Doctor is apparently gazing at his reflection in a wall screen.)
DAVROS: Make your confession, Doctor. Why did you really leave Gallifrey?
DOCTOR: How long has it been, you and I?
DAVROS: Long enough. Galaxies have burned.
DOCTOR: And now you ask me a personal question?
DAVROS: You have slaughtered billions of my children, as I have slaughtered billions of your race. We have exhausted the conventional means of communication.
(The Doctor removes his sunglasses.)
DOCTOR: My people are alive. They didn't die. I brought them back. I found a way.
DAVROS: Is this true?
DOCTOR: Gallifrey is back in the sky. I don't know where, I may never know. But Gallifrey is back and it is safe from both of us.
DAVROS: Doctor, my most sincere congratulations.
DOCTOR: I'm sorry?
DAVROS: This is wonderful news. Beyond all hope. I congratulate you.
DOCTOR: Why are you saying that?
DAVROS: A man should have a race, a people, an allegiance. A man should belong, Doctor. Believe me, please. I am happy for you. So happy.
DOCTOR: I don't, I don't understand this. Why are you
(The Doctor is speechless.)
DAVROS: Come closer again. Let me see your face.
DOCTOR: You've seen it often enough.
DAVROS: Let me see it again with my own eyes.
(The blue light in his forehead goes out. The Doctor leans forward as Davros opens his rheumy eyes.)
DAVROS: Closer, please.
(Their eyes meet.)
DAVROS: If you have redeemed the Time Lords from the fire, do not lose them again. Take the darkest path into the deepest hell, but protect your own as I have sought to protect mine. Did I do right, Doctor? Tell me.
(Davros puts his hand on the Doctor's.)
DAVROS: Was I right? I need to know before the end. Am I a good man?
DOCTOR: You really are dying, aren't you?
DAVROS: Look at me. Did you doubt it?
DOCTOR: Yes.
DAVROS: Then we have established one thing only.
DOCTOR: What?
DAVROS: You are not a good doctor.
(They both chuckle, then Davros struggles to breathe.)
DAVROS: Pity. I had hoped to see the sun one last time with the eyes of my true self.

[Control room]

MISSY: Oh, hello! Look at you all, with your nice, shiny domes. Oh, I am loving this. (to Dalek Supreme) You're my secret favourite. Don't tell the others.
(She sits on his dais.)
DALEK SUPREME: You are an enemy of the Daleks.
MISSY: Yes, well, anyone who's not a Dalek is an enemy of the Daleks, so that was an easy guess.
DALEK SUPREME: You will be exterminated.
MISSY: Please, please do, because I have been on my feet all day.
(She stands again.)
MISSY: But before you get all exterminate-y, two things. One, I want to see Davros. Two, I have a lovely little gift for you all, if you take me to him right now.
DALEK SUPREME: We do not negotiate.
MISSY: Clara Oswald. I brought you complete control of the Doctor, gift-wrapped. Better. Canned.
(Clara is speechless.)

[Davros' room]

(Davros is by the window, looking out.)
DAVROS: It is beautiful, my world, is it not?
DOCTOR: How did you get it back?
DAVROS: The Daleks remade it. Like you, they have a strong concept of home.
DOCTOR: No, like you. Everything you are, they are.
(The Doctor is plugging Davros back into the life support cables.)
DAVROS: Like both of us, perhaps. How far we have come to go home again.
DOCTOR: I'm trying to pep this up, but you've been going a long time. Every Dalek on Skaro isn't enough any more.
DAVROS: It is so good of you to help me.
DOCTOR: I'm not helping you. I'm helping a little boy I abandoned on a battlefield. I think I owe him a sunrise.
(The sun is edging above a mountain range.)
DOCTOR: Come on, chin up.
(Davros moans.)
DOCTOR: Any minute now
DAVROS: I have always admired you, Doctor.
DOCTOR: Here it comes.
DAVROS: I wish, just once, we had been on the same side.
DOCTOR: Look, the sun's coming up. We're on the same side now.
DAVROS: I regret I cannot open my eyes.
(Davros is crying.)
DOCTOR: Okay, don't ever tell anyone that I did this.
(He waves his hand around until a golden glow forms.)
DOCTOR: A little bit of regeneration energy. Probably cost me an arm or a leg somewhere down the line. Or I'll just be really little.
(The Doctor stands in the middle of the cables where Davros used to be. Davros chuckles to himself as the Doctor takes hold of a cable with his glowing hand.)
DOCTOR: Should be enough, just to
(The Doctor screams as snakes bind his hands to the cables.)
DAVROS: Hold him firm, Colony Sarff. He is precious to us now.
(The Doctor is on his knees with pain as regeneration energy flows though the cables to Davros..)
DOCTOR: What are you doing?
DAVROS: Regeneration energy. The ancient magic of the Time Lords. I thought I would have to tear you apart to take it from you but, as always, your compassion is your downfall.
(Davros' voice gets stronger through this.)
DOCTOR: No! No! No, please! No!
DAVROS: You have opened your veins of your own free will, and all Daleks shall drink the blood of Gallifrey. They shall rise stronger than ever.
(The Doctor screams as wizened Davros fills out and straightens up in his chair..)

[Control room]

(Clara is listening open-mouthed inside the Dalek casing.)
DALEK SUPREME: Where is Clara Oswald? You will tell us! You will tell us! You will tell us
(Missy is dancing in rhythm to the Dalek's speech when suddenly they all stop, sink plungers and weapons pointing towards the floor.)
MISSY: I'm sorry. Was I, er, was I boring you?
(Golden regeneration energy starts to rise from the Daleks.)
MISSY: No. No, no, no, no, Doctor. What have you done?
CLARA [in the Dalek]: What's happening?
CLARA DALEK: What is happening?
MISSY: I have to find the Doctor.
CLARA: No!
CLARA DALEK: Exterminate!
CLARA: No!
CLARA DALEK: Exterminate!
CLARA: Please, you can't just leave me here. Please!
(She follows Missy out of the room.)

[Davros' room]

DAVROS: There was a prophecy, Doctor, on your own world.
DOCTOR: Please you must, you must stop this. You must stop this!
DAVROS: It spoke of a hybrid creature. Two great warrior races forced together to create a warrior greater than either. Is that what you ran from, Doctor? Your part in the coming of the hybrid? Half Dalek, half Time Lord?

[Corridor]

(Missy encounters a motionless Dalek.)
MISSY: Give me your gun!
(She wrenches it from the Dalek and shoots the lock to Davros' room.)

[Davros' room]

DOCTOR: Stop!
(The Doctor screams. Missy runs in and starts shooting with the Dalek gun. Finally she destroys the cables and kills Colony Sarff, who falls to the floor The Doctor collapses.)

[Control room]

(The Daleks reboot after their upgrade.)
DALEK SUPREME: We are renewed. We are more powerful. The experiment has succeeded. All praise Davros.
DALEKS: All praise Davros! All praise Davros! (etc., etc.)

[Davros' room]

(Missy slaps the Doctor awake.)
MISSY: Morning.
DOCTOR: Where's Clara?
MISSY: Oh, hello to you, too.
DOCTOR: You're alive, so she is too. Where is she?
MISSY: I'm fine, thanks for asking.
DAVROS: Oh, you are not fine. Thanks to you, Doctor, my creations shall grow to yet greater supremacy, and my own life is prolonged. This is the final defeat of the Time Lords. Have you nothing to say, Doctor?
DOCTOR: Three.
(The Doctor retrieves his confession dial and puts it in his pocket.)
DAVROS: Do you understand what has happened? Hear my children sing.
DOCTOR: Two.
MISSY: Oh, I know that face.
DAVROS: All praise Davros, creator and saviour of the Daleks.
DOCTOR: One.
(The city shakes.)
DAVROS: What is that? What's happening?

[Control room]

DALEK SUPREME: We are under attack. Explain! Explain!

[Davros' room]

DOCTOR: I knew exactly what you were doing, and I let you do it. You transmitted regeneration energy into every Dalek on this planet. Every single one.
DAVROS: What have you done?
DOCTOR: One word. Er, no, two words, actually. First word, moron.
(Missy sniggers.)
DOCTOR: Second word, sewers.

[Control room]

(The floor cracks.)
DALEK: Emergency! What is happening? Power is fluctuating!

[Davros' room]

DAVROS: No. This cannot be correct. How can this be?
DOCTOR: Generations of Daleks just woke up very cross, and they are coming up the pipes. Or to put it another way, bye!
(The Doctor leaves.)
DAVROS: Doctor, you must help me.
MISSY: Can I just say, it's been an absolute pleasure to finally meet you?
(She gives a little curtsey and holds out her hand, then pokes Davros in his blue eye. It hurts. Then she runs out.)
MISSY: Doctor!

[Control room]

(The city is falling apart. The Doctor touches the viscous yuk oozing from cracks in the walls and out of ventilation grills in a corridor. The chief Daleks have the stuff going in and coming out of them while the Dalek Supreme spins on its dais.)
DALEK: My vision is impaired. I cannot see.
DALEK SUPREME: (spinning) Alert. I cannot control.

[Corridor]

(The Doctor encounters an unaffected Dalek approaching from a side corridor.)
CLARA DALEK: Doctor!
DOCTOR: This city is about to be sucked into the ground. Your own sewer is about to consume you. There's no way you can win, there is nothing you can do, so just tell me, where is Clara Oswald?
CLARA DALEK: I am a Dalek.
DOCTOR: Yes, you're a Dalek. Where is Clara?
CLARA DALEK: I am a Dalek.
DOCTOR: Yes, I know that you're a Dalek. Where is Clara Oswald?
(The Dalek stops in front of the Doctor.)
CLARA [in the Dalek]: It's me, I'm right here! It's me, I'm in here! It's Clara!
CLARA DALEK: I am a Dalek! I am a Dalek!
(Missy runs up with the Dalek gun and points it at the Dalek.)
MISSY: Doctor, stop! It's you, isn't it? I mean, no offence, you all look alike, but it is it is you?
CLARA [in the Dalek]: Yes, it's me, it's me. I'm right here.
CLARA DALEK: Affirmative.
MISSY: Clara's dead, Doctor. This is the one that killed her.
CLARA DALEK: Do not listen to her. I am a Dalek, I am a Dalek.
MISSY: I got her out of the city, but this one caught us and shot her down. There was nothing I could do, I'm afraid.
CLARA DALEK: I am a Dalek.
MISSY: She ran. She screamed. I'm so glad you didn't have to see that.
CLARA DALEK: I am a Dalek. I am a Dalek.
MISSY: This one's a mad one, isn't it? I mean, it's almost like, like it's proud.
CLARA DALEK: I am a Dalek. I am a Dalek. I am a Dalek!
(Missy moves behind the Doctor and puts the gun in his hand.)
MISSY: Kill it, Doctor. They're all going to die anyway. Indulge yourself. Go on, kill the Dalek.
CLARA DALEK: Do not kill me! Do not kill me!
(The Doctor points the gun at the Dalek.)
DOCTOR: Is Clara dead?
CLARA [in the Dalek]: No! Doctor, no! I'm not dead, I'm in here! Can you hear me?
CLARA DALEK: I am a Dalek. I am alive.
CLARA [in the Dalek]: I'm your friend. I'm your friend!
CLARA DALEK: I am your enemy. Your enemy.
CLARA [in the Dalek]: No, please, don't.
CLARA DALEK: Mercy. Mercy.
DOCTOR: You shouldn't be able to say that.
CLARA DALEK: Mercy.
DOCTOR: That word shouldn't exist in your vocabulary. How did Davros teach you to say that?
CLARA DALEK: Mercy.
DOCTOR: Why aren't you trying to kill me?
CLARA DALEK: Mercy.
CLARA [in the Dalek]: Because I would never kill you. You are the last person I would ever kill.
CLARA DALEK: I show mercy.
DOCTOR: I'm putting the gun down. Open your casing.
CLARA [in the Dalek]: How?
CLARA DALEK: How?
DOCTOR: Just think the word "open". It'll work.
(Clara sighs and obeys. The casing opens to reveal her.)
MISSY: Oh, look at that. Now, there's a surprise.
DOCTOR: Missy, run.
CLARA: Oh, Doctor  
(The Doctor starts to disconnect Clara from the Dalek casing.)
MISSY: In a way, this is why I gave her to you in the first place. To make you see. The friend inside the enemy, the enemy inside the friend.
DOCTOR: I'm sorry, Clara. I'm so sorry!
MISSY: Everyone's a bit of both. Everyone's a hybrid.
DOCTOR: I said, run.
MISSY: It wasn't me who ran, Doctor. That was always you.
(Missy walks away.)

[Control room]

DALEK SUPREME: Emergency! Dalek control is compromised.
(The Doctor and Clara run in. A bit of ceiling falls.)
DOCTOR: Where was the Tardis? It was over there somewhere, wasn't it?
(He is still holding the Dalek gun.)
DALEK SUPREME: What is happening? Explain! Explain!
DOCTOR: Dalek Supreme, your sewers are revolting.
(More rubble falls as he and Clara run to the indicated spot.)
DALEK SUPREME: You will assist, or you will be exterminated.
DOCTOR: Oh, well, go on, then. Exterminate away.
CLARA: Doctor!
(The Daleks fire, but the energy bolts bounce off something invisible around them.)
DOCTOR: Oops, sorry. Tardis force field is still here. We get in, you don't.
DALEK SUPREME: The Tardis has been destroyed.
DOCTOR: Ah, don't be silly, of course it hasn't. It just redistributed itself for a moment. Hostile Action Dispersal System. I'll give it a quick blast from my sonic, and the real time envelope will reassemble right here.
CLARA: Doctor, you don't have your screwdriver.
DOCTOR: Oh, yeah, I'm over screwdrivers. They spoil the line of your jacket. These days, I'm all about wearable technology.
(He puts on his sunglasses.)
CLARA: No! No? Seriously?
(The Doctor twitches the glasses and -)
DALEK SUPREME: What is happening?
DOCTOR: Oh, same old, same old. Just the Doctor and Clara Oswald in the Tardis.
(The Tardis reforms around the Doctor and Clara, then dematerialises.)

[Corridor]

(Missy runs into a bunch of Daleks.)
DALEKS: Humanoid detected. Humanoid detected. Remain still. Do not move. Do not move. You are a Time Lord.
(The building shakes. She staggers.)
MISSY: You know what? I've just had a very clever idea.

[Planet surface]

(The Doctor and Clara watch the city disintegrate from a high ridge.)
CLARA: No chance you're going to tell me what's in that confession dial, I suppose?
(He puts it in his trouser pocket.)
CLARA: Hmm.
DOCTOR: It doesn't make sense.
CLARA: What doesn't?
DOCTOR: When you were in the Dalek, you made it say mercy.. It shouldn't have understood the concept, it shouldn't have been able to say it. How did a tiny piece of mercy get into the DNA of the Daleks?
(Long pause as the obvious reason finally dawns on him, then he runs to the Tardis clutching the Dalek gun.)
CLARA: Doctor?

[Battlefield]

YOUNG DAVROS: Help me! You can't leave me, you promised. You said I had a chance.
(The Tardis materialises behind him.)
YOUNG DAVROS: Who are you? I don't get it. How did you get there?
DOCTOR: From the future.
YOUNG DAVROS: Are you going to save me?
DOCTOR: I'm going to save my friend the only way I can. Exterminate!
(He blasts all the hand mines to oblivion.)
DOCTOR: Come on, I'll take you home.
YOUNG DAVROS: Which side are you on? Are you the enemy?
DOCTOR: I'm not sure that any of that matters, friends, enemies. So long as there's mercy. Always mercy.  
(The Doctor holds out his hand. The boy Davros takes it and they walk away together.)

The Drum: Underwater Mining Facility, Caithness, Scotland, 2119
(We are flown over a large underwater base with lots of lights on.)
MORAN [OC]: Private journal of Captain Jonathan Moran, 21st November 2119. We have located a craft of unknown origin on the lake floor. Visual scans in situ revealed nothing, so we have brought the craft on board and myself and the crew will now investigate.

[Main hangar]

(The mystery craft is a cross between Thunderbird Four and a Star Trek space shuttle - there are steps on the back hatch which has lowered as a ramp up into a singe empty compartment with one large rectangular object inside. Moran is a large man standing just inside it.)
MORAN: How did they miss this in the initial survey?
LUNN: Cass says it was buried, and then the currents of the water must have shifted the rubble around.
(Cass is a deaf lady who uses sign language, and Lunn is her interpreter. Another man wearing glasses - Bennett - is scanning with a Geiger counter.)
PRITCHARD: A conversation needs to be had about who owns this spaceship.
MORAN: Can we stop calling it a spaceship? We don't know what it is.
PRITCHARD: A case could be made that this is an asset, and my company has bought the rights to all assets 
MORAN: Whoa, whoa. What's this? Lunn, grab me a torch, will you?
(There are four strange symbols apparently scratched into the port side of the inner hull.)
MORAN: It was found on MOD property, even if that property is underwater.
(Lunn goes to a wall cabinet and we see something flash past at speed. When he shuts the cabinet door a face is briefly seen behind his own, but as he turns around there is no one there.)
MORAN: What you bought is the oil under the ground. Lunn! Where's the torch?
(O'Donnell, a young lady with pony tail and baseball cap, gets the torch from Lunn and hands it to Moran. He shines it on the symbols and we see them in his eyes. The two of them leave the vessel.)
CASS via LUNN: Can I go in?
MORAN: What is the radiation count?
BENNETT: Pretty much background level.
O'DONNELL: Anything more, it would have shown up on the initial survey twenty years ago.
LUNN: (signs to Cass) If it's not safe, how come you can go in?
CASS via LUNN: How long do you think it's been down here?
BENNETT: Well, there's next to no corrosion. I've not seen technology like this 
MORAN: Please don't say on Earth.
BENNETT: On Earth before.
(O'Donnell laughs.)
MORAN: (sighs) Maybe it's some kind of experimental craft that got left behind when they abandoned the site.
BENNETT: Wait, you think the Army would just lose a prototype weapon?
MORAN: You're new to the military, aren't you, son?
LUNN: Cass says he might be right. It might have been here since the 1980s, when the valley flooded.
(Pritchard is peering at a circular dot design on the forward bulkhead of the craft, when he sees a hand reach for him. It belongs to a strange figure in Victorian style clothes and top hat, with long white sideburns. Then the craft's engines ignite, spurting flame.)
MORAN: Cass!
(Moran pushes Cass to safety and gets incinerated himself. Alarms sound and everyone flees.) 
LUNN: Come on! Move! Come on, we need to go now!
COMPUTER: Fire in the main hangar. Safety protocols have been initiated. All crew must evacuate immediately. This safety message was brought to you by Vector Petroleum.

[Corridor]

(Sealing a doorway.)
O'DONNELL: We can't just leave him in there!
PRITCHARD: There was something in the spaceship, I saw it!
BENNETT: O'Donnell. O'Donnell, he's dead. Didn't you see?
LUNN: The fire, are we safe out here?
BENNETT: It's fine. The CO2 will put the fire out.
O'DONNELL: (to Pritchard) It was you! You were messing about with the controls on that ship!
(Cass looks past them all and screams, and grabs Lunn to protect her. Moran is standing behind them, lips moving. There are black holes where his eyes should be.)
BENNETT: Moran. But, we just saw you 
O'DONNELL: He's. Oh, my God. He's a  ghost.
(Moran is joined by the other figure, and they both reach out for the crew.)

[Corridor]

(Three days later, the Tardis materialises. We are shown an overturned chair and a base that seems to be empty. The Doctor talks to the Tardis.)
DOCTOR: What's wrong? You're not happy. Why aren't you happy? Tell me.
CLARA [OC]: Come on! we're on a roll!
(She stands in the Tardis doorway.)
CLARA: Monsters, things blowing up. Oh, hey, can we go back to that place where the people with the long necks have been celebrating New Year for two centuries? I left my sunglasses there. And most of my dignity.
DOCTOR: Why have you brought us here?
CLARA: Here being?
(She shuts the Tardis door.)
DOCTOR: Underwater. Some sort of a base. The technology's twenty second century. Maybe military, maybe scientific.
CLARA: Is there a crew?
DOCTOR: Must be, somewhere, if there's oxygen.
(They walk down the corridor.)
CLARA: I want another adventure. Come on, you feel the same. You're itching to save a planet, I know it.
(He smiles behind her back.)

[Mess hall]

(A big mural of a dragon or serpent threatening some men in a small wooden sailing boat. Their garments look suspiciously like ST:TNG style, including the colours. This is where the overturned chair is, along with a lot of mess.)
CLARA: Doctor, look at this.
DOCTOR; Well. Looks like you got your wish.
CLARA: Food fight?
(A knife is stuck in a wall. Clara twangs it.)
DOCTOR: I think there was more to it than that. Whatever it was, it happened pretty recently.
(He sticks his finger into a cup of originally hot liquid.)
DOCTOR: Seven or eight hours ago. No bodies, though.
CLARA: And they took provisions. Okay, so something or someone forced the crew to abandon the base. Maybe they went for a swim in the creepy flooded village outside.
(They look through the windows.)
CLARA: Oh, yeah. You see, this is more like it.
(She holds out her hand for a high five?)
CLARA: Oh, come on. Don't leave me hanging.
(The Doctor walks out of the room. She follows after a few moments.)

[Corridor]

(Yet another one, but they all look the same.)
DOCTOR: Look. Told you. Crew.
(Moran and the ghost are squatting on the floor with their backs towards the Doctor and Clara.)
DOCTOR: Hello, sailors!
(The figures stand and turn, their lips moving.)
DOCTOR: Right, I did not expect that. Hands up who expected that.
(The figures walk forward.)
DOCTOR: Wait, wait. I don't think they're going to hurt us. I think that they're just curious.
(The alien stands nose to nose with the Doctor, while Moran looks down at Clara.)
CLARA: Are you sure?
DOCTOR: Well, I mean, define sure. Look at you lovely chaps. What's happened to you, then?
(The figures turn away, still muttering to themselves.)
DOCTOR: Come on.
(The Doctor and Clara follow the figures.)
CLARA: What are they?
DOCTOR: I haven't a clue. Isn't that exciting? 

[Main hangar]

(The doors open. The Doctor and Clara enter, and the doors close behind them. The fire has long been extinguished.)
CLARA: Where did they go? What is it, some kind of submarine?
DOCTOR: No, it's alien.
(They go inside the spaceship. The Doctor runs his hand over the rectangular object and sees the symbols on the wall. We see them in his eye. He points to them, and Clara picks up the light and shines it on the markings.)
DOCTOR: That's weird. The Tardis hasn't translated it.
(A strange, hissing sort of sound. Clara turns.)
CLARA: (sotto) Hey, look, they're back.
DOCTOR: Hello! Did you want to show us this? It's very nice.
CLARA: Wait, are they saying something?  
(Moran takes a fire axe from the wall, but it is very heavy for him.)
CLARA: Okay, they now appear to be arming themselves.
DOCTOR: Yes, I spotted that, too.
(They leave the craft as the other ghost takes a harpoon gun.)
DOCTOR: Was it something she said? She does that. She once had an argument with Gandhi!
(Moran swings the axe, and just misses.)
CLARA: I'm starting to see why the crew did a runner.
(The harpoon gun is fired and dodged. The Doctor and Clara run out. The ghosts walk through a wall, but their weapons have to be left behind.)

[Corridor]

(A hand reaches through the wall next to Clara. She cries out. Moran emerges, making them back away down the corridor, then the other rises up through the floor behind them. Clara grabs at the Doctor's arm.)
CLARA: Run!
(A door at the end of the corridor is opened.)
O'DONNELL: In here! Quick! 

[Faraday cage]

(The ghosts peer in though the round window in the door, but do not enter. The Doctor returns their stare.)
DOCTOR: What are you?
(The ghosts leave.)
PRITCHARD: Who the hell are you, and what are you doing here?
DOCTOR: This is Clara, and I'm the Doctor.
(He shows them his psychic paper.)
PRITCHARD: You're from UNIT.
DOCTOR: Well, if that's what it says.
PRITCHARD: I'm Pritchard, this is Bennett.
O'DONNELL: O'Donnell! Are you really the Doctor? I'm a huge fan! I mean, er, you know  Nice work.
LUNN: Tim Lunn, I sign for Cass.
DOCTOR: Tell me, what about those things out there? What are they? Why are they trying to kill us?
BENNETT: Well, they're er, they're ghosts.
DOCTOR: They're not ghosts.
LUNN: Cass is saying 
DOCTOR: Thank you, but I actually don't need your help. I can speak sign. (signs) Go ahead.
(Cass signs her reply.)
DOCTOR: No, no, actually, I can't. It's been deleted for semaphore. Someone get me a selection of flags.
CASS via LUNN: One of the ghosts is our previous commanding officer. The other, um moley guy, we don't know what he is.
DOCTOR: He's from the planet Tivoli.
BENNETT: See? I told you he was an alien. Didn't I say that?
DOCTOR: Weird thing is, they're not violent. They're too cowardly. They wouldn't say boo to a goose. They're more likely to give the goose their car keys and bank details. When did they first appear?
O'DONNELL: Oh, did you see that spaceship in the hangar? Yeah, we found that on the lake bed and we'd just got it on board and one of the engines started up and then Moran got (pause)
Moran was killed.
CASS via LUNN: Then they appeared and pretty much straight away started trying to kill us. So we grabbed what we could and we were looking for somewhere to hide, and that's when we realised the ghosts couldn't come in here.
CLARA: What is this place?
DOCTOR: It's a Faraday cage. Completely impenetrable to radio waves, and apparently, whatever those things are out there. So, who's in charge now? I need to know who to ignore.
CASS via LUNN: That would be me.
LUNN: Her.
PRITCHARD: Actually, that would be me.
(Richard Pritchard, Vice President of Sub-aquatic Resources, hand the Doctor his card.)
PRITCHARD: I represent Vector Petroleum. We've obtained the mining rights to the oil.
DOCTOR: The oil? Where are we?
(The Doctor tosses the card on the floor, and Pritchard picks it up again.)
BENNETT: This used to be a military training site. There was a dam overlooking it, but the dam burst and the valley was submerged.
PRITCHARD: Then twenty years ago, we discovered a massive oil reservoir underneath it.
COMPUTER: Good morning. Entering day mode.
(The lights brighten.)
O'DONNELL: Okay, it's morning. We can go outside now.
LUNN: Thank God for that.
PRITCHARD: At last, we can get out of here.
CLARA: Morning?
BENNETT: (Taking a towel from a hook.) Yeah, we're too far below the surface for daylight, so we have to demarcate artificial days and nights.
(O'Donnell opens the door.)
DOCTOR: I'd like to have a further look at that spaceship, but what about those things that aren't ghosts?
O'DONNELL: Oh, it's all right. They only come out at night.
CLARA: (sotto) Weird how that is not comforting. 

[Main hangar]

DOCTOR: If whatever they are 
PRITCHARD: They're ghosts.
DOCTOR: They're not ghosts. Have been trying to kill you, why haven't you abandoned the base?
PRITCHARD: That was my call. We've got about a trillion dollars worth of mining equipment here. We're not just going to abandon it  What? If it all goes pear-shaped, it's not them that lose a bonus.
DOCTOR: It's okay. I understand. You're an idiot. Come to mention it, why is there a Faraday cage on the base?
BENNETT: It's the mining equipment. It runs on nuclear fission. The Faraday cage has been lined with lead to act as a shelter in the event of a radiation leak.
DOCTOR: So, we are fighting an unknown homicidal force that has taken the form of your commanding officer and a cowardly alien, underwater, in a nuclear reactor. Anything else I should know? Someone got a peanut allergy, or something?
(The Doctor and Clara go back into the spaceship.)
DOCTOR: It all started with this ship. This is where the answer will be.
(He looks down at a section of the deck, then removes a hatch.)
DOCTOR: What's happened to the stuff you've removed? This is for long-haul flights. There should be a suspended-animation chamber for the pilot right here. Plus, one of the power cells is missing.
PRITCHARD: Power cell?
(He runs up the steps into the spaceship.)
DOCTOR: Yeah. You can see the casing is empty.
(Cass and Lunn are having a vigorous discussion.)
LUNN: It's not safe out here!
CLARA: What's the matter?
LUNN: She won't let me look inside the spaceship. She says it's not safe. I'm saying it's not safe out here.
PRITCHARD: I imagine they're pretty valuable.
DOCTOR: What?
PRITCHARD: I mean powerful. Those power cells. I imagine they're pretty powerful.
DOCTOR: Well, they can zap a vessel from one side of the galaxy to the other, so, you know, take a wild stab in the dark.
PRITCHARD: And the missing one must still be out there.
DOCTOR: Yes, well, otherwise. Sorry, why is this man still talking to me?
O'DONNELL: We haven't removed anything. There hasn't been time.
(Pritchard leaves, then the Doctor leaves the spaceship.)
DOCTOR: So what have we got? Moran dies, and then those things appear. They can walk through walls. They only come out at night and they're sort of see-through.
CLARA: Doctor, wait, you're not saying  

[Bridge]

(Computer stations, control panels on walls, and a nice illuminated map of the base.)
DOCTOR: They're ghosts! Yeah, ghosts 
CLARA: You said there was no such thing. You actually pooh-poohed the ghost theory.
DOCTOR: Yes, well, well, there was no such thing as, as socks or smartphones and badgers until there suddenly were. Besides, what else could they be? They're not holograms, they're not Flesh Avatars, they're not Autons, they're not digital copies bouncing around the Nethersphere. No, these people are literally, actually, dead. Wow. This is, it's amazing! I've never actually met a proper ghost.
CASS via LUNN: Moran was our friend.
CLARA: (sotto) The cards.
DOCTOR: Oh! Oh, right you are.
(He fumbles in his pocket for a set of record cards.)
CLARA: (sotto) Oh, come here.
(Clara sorts through them looking for the right one. I completely understand why it was difficult not to get captured. It was my fault, I should have known you didn't live in Aberdeen. I didn't mean to imply that I don't care. No one is going to get eaten / vapourised / exterminated / upgraded / possessed / mortally wounded turned to jelly we'll all get out of this unharmed. She clears her throat and hands him the next one.)
DOCTOR: Ahem. I'm very sorry for your loss. I'll do all I can to solve the death of your friend slash family member slash pet.
(Clara gives in a Look and takes the card back.)
DOCTOR: But don't you see what this means? Death! It was the one thing that unified every single living creature in the universe, and now it's gone. How can you just sit there? Don't you want to go out there right now, wrestle them to the ground and ask them questions until your throat falls out? What's death like? Does it hurt? Do you still get hungry? Do you miss being alive? Why can you only handle metal objects? Oh, I didn't know I'd noticed that. Okay, so they'll try to kill you, blah, blah, blah. What does that matter? You come back. A bit murder-y, sure, but even so! Calm, Doctor, calm. You were like this when you met Shirley Bassey. Okay. Question one. What is a ghost? Question two. What do they want?
(The lights go out.)
O'DONNELL: Whoa. Whoa, what's happening?
COMPUTER: Good evening. Entering night mode.
O'DONNELL: That's not right. We're switching back into night mode again. This can't happen! No, no, no!
(She sits at a computer terminal. Then a distant bell starts to toll.)
BENNETT: Er, what's doing that?
CLARA: Doctor?
DOCTOR: The Tardis Cloister Bell!
(He runs out.)

[Tardis]

CLARA: Doctor, what's wrong?
DOCTOR: It must be the ghosts. That's why she was upset when we got here.
CLARA: Why? I don't understand.
DOCTOR: It's just what I was saying. You live and you die. That's it. The ghosts are aberrations. A splinter of time in the skin. They're unnatural. She wants to get away from them.
CLARA: So, what do we do?
(The Doctor turns a handle on the console. The Cloister Bell stops and the engines power down.)
DOCTOR: Put the handbrake on.
(Clara takes off her jacket and heads for the doors.)
DOCTOR: Whoa! Ho, ho, ho, ho! Where do you think you're going?
CLARA: Out there, where the action is.
DOCTOR: Look, you, er  
CLARA: What?
DOCTOR: Oh, this is my own fault. I like adventures as much as the next man. If the next man is a man who likes adventures. Even so, don't, don't go native.
CLARA: What do you mean? I'm not.
DOCTOR: Look, there's a whole dimension in here, but there's only room for one me.
CLARA: Wait, wait a second. You just raved about ghosts like a kid who had too much sherbet.
DOCTOR: Do you know what you need? You need a hobby.
CLARA: I really don't.
DOCTOR: Or even better, another relationship. Come on, you lot, you're bananas about relationships. You're always writing songs about them, or going to war, or getting tattooed 
CLARA: Doctor, I'm fine.
DOCTOR: I just felt that I, I, I had to say something.
CLARA: I know. And I appreciated it.
DOCTOR: Because I've got a duty of care.
CLARA: Which you take very seriously, I know.
DOCTOR: So can I stop now?
CLARA: Please. Please do.
(They leave. The Tardis groans.)

[Airlock]

O'DONNELL [OC]: Attention, all crew. The Drum has switched to night mode early so grab provisions and make your way to the Faraday cage.
(A man is in a full dry suit. He removes his helmet whilst talking and puts it down. A figure is on the other side of the airlock door.)
PRITCHARD: That you, Bennett? I went out looking for that missing power cell. Okay, contractually, it's a grey area, but I reckon we can argue everything non-indigenous is an asset and therefore 
(He realises something is not right.)
PRICHARD: Bennett?
(Moran steps forward on the other side of the door.)
PRITCHARD: We're meant to be in day mode! You shouldn't be here.
(Moran whispers incomprehensibly.)
PRITCHARD: What? What? What what are you saying?
(As he looks through the window he sees Moran touch the outer door override control. Pritchard tries to get to his helmet but - )
PRITCHARD: No, Moran! Don't!
(The airlock is suddenly flooded.)

[Mess hall]

(Clara is helping Bennett gather provisions.)
O'DONNELL [OC]: Pritchard, you are unaccounted for. Contact the bridge or get to the Faraday cage immediately. Pritchard, contact the bridge or get to the Faraday cage!
BENNETT: I'd love to work for UNIT, Earth's first line of defence, and all. I'm probably not suited, though. Not much of a fighter. More of a bleeder.
(A figure in a dry suit has his back to them.)
CLARA: Pritchard! Where you have you been? Everyone's been looking for you. What's with the wet suit?
BENNETT: Yeah, where have you been? 

[Bridge]

BENNETT [OC]: O'Donnell, it's okay. Pritchard's in here!.
O'DONNELL: Pritchard, you moron. Grab your stuff, we're locking down early. In case I can't get this back into day mode.

[Mess hall]

CLARA: Is he all right?
(Something bumps against the windows. It is a figure in a dry suit floating outside.)
BENNETT: Man overboard. Man overboard! We need a rescue team in the water now!
CLARA: Bennett, wait! It's Pritchard.
(The figure with them turns around to show its black eye sockets. Cass, Lunn and the Doctor run in.)
CLARA: He's a ghost. He's another ghost.
(Ghost Pritchard picks up a chair and advances towards them.)

[Bridge]

(O'Donnell works at the computer consoles.)
O'DONNELL: Come on, come on. Come on, come on, come on, come on, come on.
(In the mess hall, the lights come on, Pritchard vanishes and the chair falls to the floor.)
COMPUTER: Good morning. Entering day mode.
(They watch CCTV of what happened to Pritchard on a wall screen. The alien ghost is a few steps behind Moran.)
PRITCHARD [on screen]: No! No, Moran! Don't!
DOCTOR: They're working out how to use the base against us. Altering the time settings so they can go about uninhibited, opening the airlocks. They're learning.
CLARA: And now there's three of them.
BENNETT: Cass, what do we do?
CASS via LUNN: We abandon the base. Topside can send down a whole team of marines or ghost-busters or whatever.
DOCTOR: Wait, wait.
CASS via LUNN: I can't force you to leave, so you can stay and do the whole cabin in the woods thing and get killed or drowned, if you want. But my first priority is to protect my crew.
CLARA: (sotto) But we're coming back, aren't we?
DOCTOR: (sotto) Yes, we're coming back.
CASS via LUNN: O'Donnell, contact Topside. Tell them we're abandoning the base on my orders.
(O'Donnell uses a sort of field telephone.)
O'DONNELL: Topside, Topside, this is Lance Corporal Alice O'Donnell from Drum Control. Over.
TOPSIDE [OC]: Drum Control, this is Topside. We have received your message. Submarine on its way. Over.
O'DONNELL: Repeat, Topside. Over.
TOPSIDE [OC]: We've received your request for a rescue sub. It's two minutes away. Over.
O'DONNELL: Topside, who did you speak to and when was this request made? Over.
TOPSIDE [OC]: Drum Control, it was in Morse code and arrived maybe half an hour ago. Said it was urgent, comms were down, two crew members critically ill, full paramedic team requested. Over.
(The Doctor snatches the handset.)
DOCTOR: Topside, this is the Doctor, UNIT security visa seven one zero Apple zero zero. You may be familiar with my work. Call back the sub.
TOPSIDE [OC]:'Doctor, why would
DOCTOR: Call it back! We have a hazardous and undefined contagion on board. This base is now under quarantine.
(He puts the handset down.)
BENNETT: What did you do that for?
DOCTOR: Well, none of us sent the message, did we? So that means that the ghosts sent it, which means they want that crew down here.
LUNN: Why would they do that?
DOCTOR: Well, I don't know, but I'm pretty certain it's not so they can all form a boy band. Okay. We solve this on our own. The ghosts can only come out at night so they change the base's time settings. Why? What's different at night?
O'DONNELL: It's mainly atmospheric. The lights are dim, the noise from the engines is muffled.
DOCTOR: No. Something, something else.
CASS via LUNN: The diagnostic sweep. When the systems are checked, that stops at night to save power.
DOCTOR: What systems specifically?
O'DONNELL: Life support, the locks. They're electromagnetic. They have to be secured in case of flooding, so throughout the day, they're checked, one by one, every few seconds.
DOCTOR: The answer is in there somewhere, I can smell it.
CLARA: Doctor, what do we do?
DOCTOR: O'Donnell. Excellent work, returning the base to day mode.
O'DONNELL: Shut up. It was nothing  You really think so?
DOCTOR: Now put it back into night mode.
O'DONNELL: What!
DOCTOR: We know nothing. We don't know what they want. That's what's getting us killed. Well, I won't run. Not any more. So, O'Donnell, kindly put the base back into night mode. We want to know what these ghosts are after? We ask them. We're going to do the impossible. We're going to capture a ghost. 

[Mess hall]

(The lights go down in sequence in the modular corridors, then the night lights come on. Pritchard is half inside a wall, the alien is standing sideways halfway up a wall and Moran is hanging down from the ceiling.)
COMPUTER: Good evening. Entering night mode.
(Bennett enters nervously.)
BENNETT: H-Hey, how's it going?
(Ghost Pritchard steps fully out of the wall in front of him and he runs out.)

[Bridge]

(Everyone is on CCTV on various wall screens.)
O'DONNELL: Bennett's got them moving, and Clara's in position.
(The Doctor is at the big wall map of the base.)
DOCTOR: Clara, Bennett is going to run across the top of the T-junction to your right

[Corridor]

DOCTOR [OC]: In about ten seconds. Draw the ghosts towards you. Turn right, and then take second left.
(The running man passes the junction, then the alien ghost comes into view, walking just a few yards behind.)
CLARA: Hey! Hey, ghosts. Down here!
(All three follow Clara.)

[Bridge]

DOCTOR: Lunn, they're coming your way. Clara's going to duck down to her left. You've got to keep the ghosts going on the same route they're on now.

[Corridor]

DOCTOR [OC]: Then, after about fifty yards on your left, there is a flood door.

[Bridge]

DOCTOR: O'Donnell will close the door once you're through.

[Corridor]

LUNN: I, I can hear them.

[Bridge]

DOCTOR: Lunn, don't let them see where you go.

[Intersection]

(Lunn steps out, Clara sees him and ducks out to her left just before the ghosts arrive.)
LUNN: Hey! Yeah, this way.
(But the alien and Moran turn to follow Clara. Only Pritchard follows Lunn.)
LUNN: We've got a problem!

[Bridge]

O'DONNELL: They've separated.
DOCTOR: What?
O'DONNELL: Moran and the mole guy are going after Clara.

[Corridor]

O'DONNELL [OC]: Clara, look out. Two ghosts are still on your case. Right behind you.
CLARA: I'm beginning to think we should have let the ghosts in on the plan.

[Bridge]

DOCTOR: Clara, there's a flood door at the end of the corridor, around the corner to your right. We'll close it from here. Listen to me. You've got to get through that door before Moran and the other ghost sees you.

[Flood door]

CLARA: Doctor.

[Bridge]

DOCTOR: Now, O'Donnell, fast as you can!
(Door 17018 closes and Clara stands against it, out of sight of the ghosts, who pass by.)

[Corridor]

LUNN: Guys, I'm nearly at my door.
(Lunn goes through the open doorway.)

[Bridge]

DOCTOR: Now, Lunn, quickly.
(O'Donnell closes the door.)

[Flood door]

LUNN: It saw me. Oh, God.

[Bridge]

LUNN [OC]: It saw me. It's coming through. It's coming through the door.
(They watch as ghost Pritchard steps through the door.)
O'DONNELL: We don't have a camera in there.
(The Doctor stops Cass from leaving.)
DOCTOR: No, no, Lunn. Lunn, can you hear me? Can you hear me? Lunn, what's happening?
(In the flood compartment or whatever it is, Lunn backs up to the rear wall then closes his eyes and cringes as Pritchard comes right up to him and reaches for a wrench on the wall. It stares at the whimpering man, then the wrench falls to the floor with a clatter. They see Pritchard walking off down a corridor.)
DOCTOR: Lunn, can you hear me? Lunn? Lunn?

[Floor door]

DOCTOR [OC]: Can you hear me? Lunn, Lunn? Lunn, Lunn! What's happening? Lunn? Lunn? Can you hear me?
LUNN: I'm okay.

[Bridge]

O'DONNELL: Cass, he's alive.
LUNN [OC]: It didn't hurt me. I'm okay
DOCTOR: What? What's wrong with you? Why didn't it hurt you? Bennett, you're on again. Bennett, where are you?
(O'Donnell calls him up on CCTV.)
O'DONNELL: There. Oh, God, look.
DOCTOR: Bennett, can you hear me?

[Corridor]

DOCTOR [OC]: There are two ghosts just around the corner from you.
BENNETT: (sotto) Yes, thanks, I'd noticed.
(The alien and Moran are swaying and muttering at each other.)

[Bridge]

DOCTOR: The Faraday cage is across the intersection and down the corridor to your right. This last bit is down to you.
(Bennett runs, the ghosts follow. Pritchard joins them.)

[Corridor]

BENNETT: Okay, so, the good news is, they aren't split up any more. Cue Clara!
(Clara appears in the open door to the Faraday cage. The ghosts walk in, and straight through her. She flickers. The door shuts and locks.)

[Outside the Faraday cage]

(The Doctor puts on his sonic sunglasses.)
DOCTOR: We need to talk. Sorry, chaps. Just a hologram. You play a little bit too rough.
(Holo-Clara disappears.)

[Bridge]

(Bennett, Clara and Lunn return. Cass hugs Lunn, and O'Donnell punches Bennett's arm.)
CLARA: I'm fine, by the way, in case any of you were worried.

[Outside the Faraday cage]

DOCTOR: Cass, are you seeing this?

[Bridge]

O'DONNELL: Sonic glasses Wi-Fi locked in. On screen B2.
LUNN: She says she can't see them properly.

[Outside the Faraday cage]

LUNN [OC]: The glass is too thick and they're too far away.
DOCTOR: Open the door. 

[Bridge]

O'DONNELL: What?
CLARA: Doctor, you can't go in there, they will kill you!

[Faraday cage]

DOCTOR: They don't have any weapons or access to any of the controls. They can't hurt me, so open the door.
(Clara gives O'Donnell the nod and the door unlocks. The Doctor steps inside and closes it behind him. Moran steps forward, lips moving, and reaches into the Doctor's body. It is not a comfortable feeling.)
DOCTOR: Cold, isn't it? Take away your weapons and you're not so scary, are you? Is that better, Cass? 

[Bridge]

(Cass looks intently at the faces of the three ghosts on the monitors, who are now enunciating their words clearly and in unison.)
LUNN: She says they're saying the same thing, the same phrase, over and over. They're saying the dark. The score. No, the sword. The for sale? No, the forsaken. The temple.

[Faraday cage]

DOCTOR: What?
LUNN [OC]: Yes, she's sure. The dark, the sword, the forsaken, the temple.
(Now we know what we are looking for, reading the lips it seems obvious.)
LUNN [OC]: Just that. Over and over.
DOCTOR: Dark, sword, forsaken, temple. What does that mean? What are you telling me, big man? Bennett! I need maps. I think I just worked out what our friend here is telling us.

[Bridge]

DOCTOR: They're coordinates.
BENNETT: How can they be coordinates?
DOCTOR: The dark? Space. So, whoever's following the coordinates knows they're going to another planet. The sword?
(The Doctor hands out an apple to Bennett, a knobby ball to O'Donnell, a table tennis ball to Clara and a Vector Petroleum place mat also to Clara in her right hand, and makes them hold them up in a diagonal line.)
DOCTOR: Orion's sword. The sword, the three stars, although one isn't actually a star but the Orion Nebula, hanging down from Orion's belt. But if viewed from back here, the Earth becomes the fourth bit of the sword. So, narrowed it down to a planet now. Getting closer.
(He retrieves the objects and puts them on the map table.)
DOCTOR: The forsaken. The forsaken or abandoned or empty town. See, it's a location, beaming out to someone or something across the universe, over and over. And every time they kill one of us 
CLARA: It strengthens the signal. Another ghost, another transmitter.
O'DONNELL: Which is why they sent for that rescue sub.
DOCTOR: Get more people down here, kill them, make even more ghosts to beam out the coordinates.
CASS via LUNN: But why are they beaming out the coordinates? Is it a distress call?
DOCTOR: It could be. Or a warning. Might even be a call to arms. It could mean, come here, they're vulnerable, help yourself. Wait a minute, though. Wait a minuet. Do you know what this means? It means that they're not a natural phenomenon. It means that someone is deliberately getting people killed, hijacking their souls and turning them into transmitters.
O'DONNELL: But what do the coordinates lead to, though? To us? To the ghosts? What?
DOCTOR: Ah! What the coordinates are for. That is part of the answer to the other question you're all thinking. (blank stares) Really? Come on. None of you? Surely just being around me makes you cleverer by osmosis? What is the other question?
CASS via LUNN: The temple. The fourth part of the directions. What's the temple?
DOCTOR: Finally. It's like pulling teeth. This is the flooded military town. Shops, houses, town square, and this.
CLARA: A church?
(A long narrow building with an annex projecting off at right angles at one end, according to the old aerial photograph.)
DOCTOR: Whatever the coordinates are for, it's in that church. Find that and you're a hop, skip and a jump to stopping them.
BENNETT: Wait, you're not suggesting that? But we're safe now. The ghosts are in the cage. We can get out of here.
DOCTOR: No one has to stay. In fact, I would prefer it if you went. You'll all get in the way and ask ridiculous questions. But, you know, (indicates Cass, Lunn and O'Donnell) you have chosen to protect and serve. (indicates Bennett) You have given yourself to science and the pursuit of knowledge. None of you have chosen anonymous or selfish lives. Go, and a part of you will always wonder, what would have happened if I'd stayed? How could I have helped? What would I have learned? I want you to go. But you should know what it is that you're leaving.
LUNN: Cass says we should go, but everything that happens here is her responsibility now, so she's going to stay. So I, er, guess I should too.
O'DONNELL: Well, count me in. Who wants to live forever, anyway?
BENNETT: Sorry, er, have you gone insane? We can go home.
(O'Donnell does a one shoulder shrug and grins.)
BENNETT: They're ghosts, though. How can they be ghosts? Well, at least if I die, you know I really will come back and haunt you all.
(Later, Bennett is controlling a drone submarine by virtual reality goggles and remote controls on his fingers, left hand for steering, right hand for power.)
BENNETT: Okay, the sub is approaching the town square. Which way is the church?
O'DONNELL North-north-west, one hundred and fifty yards. That's it. Starboard two degrees.
CLARA: What are we looking for, exactly?
DOCTOR: Something that has the power to raise the dead and turn them into transmitters. I expect we'll know it when we see it.
BENNETT: Wait, I've found the church.
DOCTOR: That's it, keep going.
(A large white casket is in amongst the debris in the church ground.)
DOCTOR: Wait. What's that? Move closer. 

[Main hangar]

DOCTOR: It's the suspended-animation chamber from the spaceship.
CLARA: So the pilot could be in there.
DOCTOR: There's something inside there. But it's deadlock sealed. I can't open it. It should be the pilot, it should be. So why do I think it isn't? More questions. Everything I solve, just more questions. I have to go back to the beginning. We arrive, we see the ghosts. They don't kill us. They lead us here, they show us the spaceship. Then they try to kill us.
(He goes inside the spaceship and looks at the symbols on the wall.)
DOCTOR: Not translated by the Tardis. Why?
(He cleans his sunglasses and puts them on to look at the scratched marks. Whirring. Then he takes them off and comes out into the hangar and speaks to Cass.)
DOCTOR: Lunn, translate for me. Whenever I step outside, you are the smartest person in the room. So, tell me, what's weird about this? I know that it's all bonkers but, you know, when you think about it, one thing keeps snagging in your mind. What is it?
CASS via LUNN: The markings on the inside of the spaceship.
DOCTOR: The markings on the inside of the spaceship. Yes! Why?
CASS via LUNN: I don't think they're just words.
DOCTOR: They're not. They're magnets.
BENNETT: Magnets? How?
DOCTOR: Well, a localised and manufactured electromagnetic field, to be precise. The dark. The sword. The forsaken. The temple. When we heard the coordinates for the first time, did anyone expect them not to be that? No, exactly. Me neither. It's like we already knew, somehow. Like the words were already in us.
O'DONNELL: So that writing is the coordinates?
DOCTOR: Everything we see or experience shapes us in some way. But these words actually rewrite the synaptic connections in your brain. They literally change the way you are wired. Clara, why don't I have a radio in the Tardis?
CLARA: You took it apart and used the pieces to make a clockwork squirrel.
DOCTOR: And because whatever song I heard first thing in the morning, I was stuck with. Two weeks of Mysterious Girl by Peter Andre. I was begging for the brush of Death's merciful hand. Don't you see? These words are an earworm. A song you can't stop humming, even after you die.
CLARA: Okay, so, the spaceship lands here. The pilot leaves the writing on the wall so whoever sees it, when they die, they become a beacon of the coordinates, while he slash she slash it snoozes in the suspended-animation chamber 
DOCTOR: Waiting for his slash her slash its mates to pick the message up. My God. Every time I think it couldn't get more extraordinary, it surprises me. It's impossible. I hate it. It's evil. It's astonishing. I want to kiss it to death.
(Alarm sounds.)
COMPUTER: Attention, all crew. Evacuate base immediately. Emergency protocols have been initiated. This safety message was brought to you by Vector Petroleum. Fuel for our futures.
(O'Donnell runs to a wall touch screen. It says Flooding Initiated. Reactor Malfunction. Emergency Cooling.)
O'DONNELL: Oh, no. The ghosts tampering with the day-night settings caused a computer malfunction. Its its first priority is to keep the reactor cool, so it's opening the hull doors and it's flooding the base.
(Water gushes into the corridors.)
LUNN: Cass says, close the internal flood doors. That'll contain the water in the central corridor.
DOCTOR: Where's the Tardis?
O'DONNELL: On the other side.
DOCTOR: We need to get there. It's our only way out.
O'DONNELL: Okay. We've got thirty seconds before the flood doors close.

[Corridor]

CLARA: (to Lunn) Come on!
(O'Donnell and Bennett make it across the central corridor before the flood door closes. Clara, Lunn and Cass are trapped on the other side.)
CLARA: Doctor!
(The Doctor dives under the other closing door just in time. He activates the intercom.)
DOCTOR: I'll get you and the others out. Sit tight, I'll come back for you.
CLARA: Just come over here in the Tardis now.
DOCTOR: The Tardis won't go there. It won't go near the ghosts.
CLARA: You can't just leave us!
DOCTOR: Listen to me. I'm going back in time to when this spaceship landed. If I can understand why this is happening, I can stop them killing anyone else. I can save you. You trust me, don't you, Clara?
(The water fills the central corridor between them. Clara nods her agreement.)
BENNETT: Wait, you're going to go back in time? How do you do that?
DOCTOR: Extremely well. 

[Mess hall]

LUNN: You're sure they're not going to hurt us?
CLARA: They can't get out of the Faraday cage.

[Tardis]

(The Doctor takes off the hand brake and the Tardis dematerialises. Bennett and O'Donnell have acquired coats and scarves from somewhere.)
DOCTOR: Back to before the flood.

[Mess hall]

CASS via LUNN: And you're sure the Doctor won't just leave us here?
CLARA: Guys, look, this is how we roll. He's going to go away, come back and we'll have to listen to how he did it.
(Looking through one of the big windows, they see a figure approaching the Drum through the water from the village.)
LUNN: Is it Moran or Pritchard or the mole guy? How, how did they get out?
CLARA: No, I don't think it's any of them. I think it's a new ghost.
LUNN: What does that mean?
CLARA: It means that something happened in the past, it means that somebody else must have. Oh, no. Oh, no, no, no, no.
(The pale ghostly figure with empty eye sockets is the Doctor.)


(The Doctor is giving us, the viewers, a lecture.)
DOCTOR: So there's this man. He has a time machine. Up and down history he goes, zip zip zip zip zip, getting into scrapes.
(He goes up to the gallery.)
DOCTOR: Another thing he has is a passion for the works of Ludwig van Beethoven.
(Holds up a vinyl LP of Beethoven's 5th.)
DOCTOR: And one day he thinks, what's the point of having a time machine if you don't get to meet your heroes? So off he goes to eighteenth century Germany. But he can't find Beethoven anywhere. No one's heard of him, not even his family have any idea who the time traveller is talking about.
(He swaps the LP for a plaster bust of Ludwig and walks down the stairs.)
DOCTOR: Beethoven literally doesn't exist. This didn't happen, by the way. I've met Beethoven. Nice chap. Very intense. Loved an arm-wrestle. No, this is called the Bootstrap Paradox. Google it. The time traveller panics.
(The bust is put down on a pile of sheet music.)
DOCTOR: He can't bear the thought of a world without the music of Beethoven. Luckily he'd brought all of his Beethoven sheet music for Ludwig to sign. So he copies out all the concertos, and the symphonies and he gets them published. He becomes Beethoven. And history continues with barely a feather ruffled. But my question is this. Who put those notes and phrases together? Who really composed Beethoven's Fifth?
(The Doctor has finished plugging in his electric guitar and plays - da da da dah! da da da dah! And now, back to our drama.)
[Railway station]

(This is a completely fake town, with Russian signs and cardboard cut-out people for target practice. There is no evidence of recent MOD usage. The Tardis has landed on the fake railway platform, I think.)
DOCTOR: Where's Bennett? We need to get going.
O'DONNELL: Oh, he's still throwing up. One small step for man, one giant bleaurgh.
DOCTOR: Oh, time travel does that sometimes.
O'DONNELL: Somehow I doubt that Rose or Martha or Amy lost their breakfast on their first trip.
DOCTOR: You seem to know an awful lot about me.
O'DONNELL: I used to be in military intelligence. I was demoted for dangling a colleague out of a window.
DOCTOR: In anger?
O'DONNELL: Is there another way to dangle someone out a window? What year are we in?
(The Doctor wets a finger and holds it up.)
DOCTOR: 1980.
O'DONNELL: So, pre-Harold Saxon. Pre-the Minister of War. Pre-the moon exploding and a big bat coming out.
DOCTOR: The Minister of War?
O'DONNELL: Yeah.
DOCTOR: No, never mind. I expect I'll find out soon enough.
(Bennett comes out of the Tardis and closes the door.)
BENNETT: Sorry about that. Had a prawn sandwich. Might have been off.
DOCTOR: Ah ha. Don't worry. Shall we go?
O'DONNELL: Just one sec, I've just got something in my boot.
(The Doctor walks away. O'Donnell jumps up and down in excitement.)
O'DONNELL: It's bigger on the inside, it's bigger on the inside, it's bigger on the inside. How can it be bigger on the inside, Bennett? (sobers up) Okay, let's roll.

[High Street]

(They catch up with the Doctor, walking past fake shop fronts, a telephone box and a poster of Stalin.)
BENNETT: Why have we gone to Russia?
DOCTOR: Er, we haven't. We're still in Scotland. This is the town before it flooded. The Tardis has brought us to when the spaceship first touched down. But here and now, it's the height of the Cold War. The military were being trained for offensives on Soviet soil.
(They find the spaceship with its rear ramp down, parked in front of the Orthodox Church.)

[Spaceship]

(They go inside. The missing stasis chamber is in place, and a wrapped mummy is lying on the other one.)
O'DONNELL: Oh, is that the pilot? My God, look at size of it.
DOCTOR: No, that's the body.
(Bennett opens the floor hatch where the two power cells are.)
O'DONNELL: What do you mean, the body?
DOCTOR: This isn't just any spaceship. It's a hearse.
BENNETT: The suspended animation chamber's still here, and the power cells for the engine.
O'DONNELL: And there are no markings on the wall.
DOCTOR: Yet.

[Outside the Church]

(The undertaker runs to meet them as they walk down the ramp, carrying a briefcase and waving a large white handkerchief.)
PRENTIS: Greetings!
O'DONNELL: It's him. That's the ghost from the Drum.
(The alien gets within an inch of the Doctor's nose, as if he is very short-sighted.)
 PRENTIS: Remarkable. Oh, and humans, too.  Albar Prentis, Funeral Director.
(He hands out business cards. Albar Prentis Universal Funeral Director. May the remorse be with you. The Doctor throws his away.)
BENNETT: You're from Tivoli, aren't you?
PRENTIS: The most invaded planet in the galaxy! Our capital city has a sign saying, if you occupied us, you'd be home by now.
DOCTOR: Yes, I've had dealings with your lot before. I can't say I'm a fan.
PRENTIS: No, we do tend to antagonise. (laughs)
(O'Donnell hears a noise and looks away briefly.)
DOCTOR: What are you doing here?
PRENTIS: Ah, yes. Of course. (runs up the ramp) This is the Fisher King. He and his armies invaded Tivoli and enslaved us for ten glorious years! Until we were liberated by the Arcateenians. But, thank the Gods, soon we'd irritated them so much, they enslaved us, too! (laughs)
BENNETT: My first proper alien, and he's an idiot.
PRENTIS: And now, in accordance with Arcateenian custom, I've come to bury him on a barren, savage outpost.
O'DONNELL: You mean the town?
DOCTOR: He means the planet.
(Prentis runs back down the ramp to the Doctor.)
PRENTIS: Although, at the risk of starting a bidding war, you could enslave me. In the ship I have directions to my planet and a selection of items that you can oppress me with.
DOCTOR: Listen, we've come from the future. You're about to send some sort of signal. How do you do it? Is it a special pen?
PRENTIS: What are you talking about?
DOCTOR: The technology you use. The thing that wrenches the soul out of the body and makes it repeat your coordinates for eternity. Give it to me now, I'm going to take the batteries out.
PRENTIS: We don't have anything like that. (laughs) Even this belongs to the glorious Arcateenians.
DOCTOR: So who sends the message?
(Prentis sniffs at the Doctor. They look up at the mummy on the slab.)
DOCTOR: Back to the Tardis. I need to talk to Clara.

[Mess hall]

(In the future, Cass is sitting observing the ghost Doctor floating just outside. Lunn approaches Clara who is sitting apart.)
LUNN: You've bee here before, in situations like this before.
CLARA: Yeah, not exactly like, but, yeah, once or twice.
LUNN: So you've had to deal with people who are scared. What do you say to them? I'm asking what I should say to you.
CLARA: That it will be all right. That the Doctor will save us.
LUNN: And when you say it, do you believe it?
CLARA: Yeah. Yeah, I do.
LUNN: And now?
(Cass attracts their attention by slapping her chair back.)
LUNN: Cass thinks the Doctor's saying something different to the others. He's saying Moran Pritchard Apprentice. No, Prentis O'Donnell Clara Doctor Bennett Cass 
It's a list of all our names and when he finishes, he just goes back to the beginning again, over and over. That's it.
CLARA: Who's Prentis?
(Her mobile phone rings.)
CLARA: It's the Doctor.
LUNN: He's alive?
CLARA: For the moment.
(Lunn signs the good news to Cass.)
CLARA: Doctor? Doctor, are you all right?
DOCTOR [OC]: Yeah, fine. So listen, the spaceship, it's a hearse.

[Tardis / Mess hall]

(The Doctor on the phone propped up against a mug on a table, Clara on the scanner.)
DOCTOR: Clara, what's wrong?
CLARA: Another ghost has appeared.
DOCTOR: What? Who? Has someone died?
CLARA: Doctor, it's you. Are you okay?
DOCTOR: Yeah. Well, currently.
CLARA: What does it mean?
DOCTOR: It means I die.
CLARA: No, not necessarily. We can change the sequence of events so
DOCTOR: This isn't a potential future. This is the future now.  It's already happened. The proof is right there in front of you. I have to die.
CLARA: No. You can change things.
DOCTOR: I can't. Even the tiniest change, the ramifications could be catastrophic. It could spread carnage and chaos across the universe like ripples on a pond. Oh, well, I've had a good innings. (to O'Donnell) This regeneration, it's a bit of a clerical error anyway. (to Clara) I've got to go sometime.
CLARA: Not with me! Die with whoever comes after me. You do not leave me.
DOCTOR: Clara, I need to talk to you just on your own.
(They pick up their respective handsets.)
DOCTOR: Listen to me. We all have to face death eventually, be it ours or someone else's.
CLARA: I'm not ready yet. I don't want to think about that, not yet.
DOCTOR: I can't change what's already happened. There are rules.
CLARA: So break them. And anyway, you owe me. You've made yourself essential to me. You've given me something else to, to be. And you can't do that and then die. It's not fair.
DOCTOR: Clara.
CLARA: No. Doctor, I don't care about your rules or your bloody survivor's guilt. If you love me in any way, you'll come back. Doctor, are you?
DOCTOR: I can't save Moran or Pritchard.
CLARA: No, but like you said, if you can, if you can find out why this is happening, maybe you can stop them killing anybody else, you can save us. And you can stop it happening to you.
DOCTOR: I'll do what I can, but the future has already happened. We've just met the Undertaker and he's still alive.
(Prentis is making notes in a book as he walks into the spaceship and discovers that the mummy wrappings are empty. He gasps, sniff, then turns and sees the symbols scratched into the bulkhead. A very large shadow looms in the opening to the spaceship. We are treated to an external view of the spaceship and hear a loud roar.
In the Tardis, the private conversation is over and the Doctor goes back to speaker mode.)
DOCTOR: So. Ghost me. You've got a better view than me. How do I look? Any signs of trauma, any scars? Any clues as to how I die?
CLARA: No, nothing. You're the same as all the other ghosts with the weird black eyes and. No. No, wait. Your coat. It's torn. The right shoulder.
(She holds up the phone to broadcast the image.)
DOCTOR: I assume I'm just saying the same thing as the others.
CLARA: No. You're saying a list of names. Our names, mainly. Moran, Pritchard, Prentis, O'Donnell, Clara, Doctor, Bennett, Cass. Who's Prentis?
DOCTOR: The mole-faced chap.
(Ghost Doctor comes through the window. Clara drops the phone on a table for a moment.)
DOCTOR: What's the matter, Clara, what's happening?
CLARA: You've moved inside. You're inside here now.
DOCTOR: What am I doing?
CLARA: Er, nothing. You're, you're just standing there.
DOCTOR: I'm not trying to kill you? Why am I not trying to kill you?
CLARA: No, wait, you're moving, going toward the control panel.
(The ghost calls up the Faraday cage in sector 4. Status: closed changes to open.)
CLARA: Oh, no. He's opened the Faraday cage. He's let the other ghosts out.
DOCTOR: I need to talk to me now.
CLARA: Didn't you hear me? You opened the Faraday cage. The other ghosts are outside. Shouldn't we be hiding?
DOCTOR: In a minute. I need to talk to the ghost me.
(Clara puts the phone on its long edge, on a cabinet.)
CLARA: Okay, Doctor, you're on.
DOCTOR: Doctor. Such an honour. I've always been a huge admirer. This is really a delight. Finally someone worth talking to. So firstly, why are you here?
(Ghost Doctor turns away.)
DOCTOR: Clara? Clara, what's happening?
(She retrieves her phone.)
CLARA: Er. Er, you, you've just stopped. Oh, no, wait, you've started again.
CASS via LUNN: His message has changed. He's saying something different. He's saying
CLARA: What?
DOCTOR: What?
LUNN: What?
CASS via LUNN: He's saying, the chamber will open tonight.
DOCTOR: Clara, now the ghosts are out, go to the Faraday cage. They won't be able to get you in there. Oh, there's a problem.
CLARA: Problem? What problem? Oh, really? Because everything else is going so smoothly
DOCTOR: The phone signal won't be able to get through. What you'll have to do, Clara, put the phone outside, and you can watch it through the little round porthole. And when you see it ringing, if it's safe to do so, go out and answer it.
CLARA: Okay, how long are you going to
DOCTOR: Clara, listen to me. Don't let that phone out of your sight. I need to be able to reach you, I need to know everything my ghost does. Do you understand? I'll come back for you. I swear.
(Clara, Cass and Lunn run out.)

[Tardis]

(Signal lost.)
DOCTOR: Come on. Oh, wait a minute. Not you, O'Donnell.
O'DONNELL: Why not?
DOCTOR: Someone needs to stay here and mind the shop. What if Clara calls?
O'DONNELL: The last bloke that said something like that to me got dangled out of a window.
BENNETT: Maybe the Doctor's right. Maybe it's best if you stay here.
O'DONNELL: Never going to happen. Seriously, have you two met me?
(O'Donnell walks between the men and leaves the Tardis. Bennett and the Doctor exchange a Look.)

[Spaceship]

(They see the undertaker lying on the bandages and run in.)
DOCTOR: Prentis. Prentis!
(The Doctor checks for a pulse.)
O'DONNELL: Guess that dead body wasn't so dead after all.
BENNETT: And now we've got the writing.
DOCTOR: The Fisher King did it himself. The future is still coming.

[Outside the Church]

(There are drag marks in the soil outside.)
DOCTOR: He's taken the suspended animation chamber to the church.
(There is a big roar.)
O'DONNELL: What was that?
DOCTOR: We need to get back to the Tardis. Now!
(They run, but a louder roar makes them stop and duck into a narrow passageway.)

[Building]

DOCTOR: It's cut us off.
O'DONNELL: Let's split up. Go on, Bennett.
(She has to dodge around a corner near a tableau of a living room while the Doctor and Bennett make it into a fake bathroom at the end. Bennett jams a chair under the door handle.
Something big is stomping and roaring as it approaches. It passes a broken window in the room where the Doctor and Bennett are hiding. The sounds fade. O'Donnell steps out of her hiding place, and a large shadow is cast over her. She turns. Big roar. Bennett pulls the chair from the door.)
DOCTOR: No, Bennett! Wait!
(Bennett runs to where O'Donnell is lying on the floor, moaning, He kneels and takes her hand, then takes her in his arms.)
BENNETT: Why did you come? You shouldn't have come. I mean, you never listen to anyone. It drives me mad.
O'DONNELL: To keep an eye on you, idiot. So, don't die.
BENNETT: No.
(O'Donnell dies. The Doctor walks up slowly.)
BENNETT: Who's next on the list?
(Bennett lays O'Donnell down, takes off his glasses and stand to face the Doctor.)
BENNETT: That list your ghost was saying, that's the order in which people are going to die, isn't it? I mean, I've only just figured that out. But you knew that all along, didn't you?
Moran, Pritchard, Prentis, O'Donnell.
DOCTOR: I thought perhaps, because her ghost wasn't there in the future, like Prentis's was, I thought maybe, maybe it wouldn't happen. Maybe she stood a chance.
BENNETT: Yeah, but you didn't try very hard to stop her, though, did you? It was almost like you wanted to test your theory. So who's next?
DOCTOR: Clara.
BENNETT: Yeah. Yeah. Except now you're going to do something about it, aren't you? Yeah, because it's getting closer to you. You change history to save yourself but not to save O'Donnell. You wouldn't save her.
DOCTOR: This isn't about saving me. I'm a dead man walking. I'm changing history to save Clara.
(Bennett walks away.)

[Faraday cage]

(Clara is at the door, staring at the phone stood on a ledge opposite. Suddenly a figure appears before her, and she jumps back.)
CLARA: O'Donnell's dead.
(Clara, Cass and Lunn watch ghost O'Donnell turn away.)
CLARA: Oh, no. No, no, no, no, don't you dare. Don't you dare.
(The ghost takes the phone and walks down the corridor.)

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: Big day for you. Time travel, twice!
BENNETT: Whoa, really? When are we going to?
DOCTOR: Off the map. Out of the rule book. What if I don't die? What if I refuse? I'm going to go back to the base and I'm going to save Clara, because that's what I do. And I don't see anyone here who's going to stop me.
(The Cloister Bell tolls and the Tardis materialises.)

[Location 512]

(512 is in big numbers on the wall above a paper target of a soldier.)
DOCTOR: Why are we still here?
(Then he sees another Tardis round the corner, with himself walking out of it.)
DOCTOR: No. No, no, no, no, no.
BENNETT: What?
DOCTOR: We've moved half an hour backwards. I'm locked in my own time stream. The Tardis won't let me leave.
BENNETT: Well, what do we do?
DOCTOR: Now we have to keep out of sight, until time catches up.
(They walk away.)
LATER DOCTOR: Where's Bennett? We need to get going.
LATER O'DONNELL: Oh, he's still throwing up.
(They see the undertaker taking sextant sightings.)
BENNETT: Prentis. He's alive.
DOCTOR: No, he's just not dead yet. And we don't tell him.
BENNETT: Yeah, but he's right there. I mean, we can just
DOCTOR: No!
(The Doctor pushes Bennett against the wall.)
DOCTOR: However that sentence ends, no, we can't. Save him, and you'll want to save O'Donnell. You can't cheat time. I just tried. You can't just go back and cut off tragedy at the root. Because you find yourself talking to someone you just saw dead on a slab. Because then you really do see ghosts. We don't tell him. Understand? Not a word. We don't have that right. 

[Outside the Church]

(Instead, they hide behind some metal barrels labelled toxic waste and watch the conversation they had in half an hours time.)
LATER PRENTIS: Albar Prentis, Funeral Director.
LATER BENNETT: You're from Tivoli, aren't you?
LATER PRENTIS: The most invaded planet in the galaxy! Our capital city has a sign saying, if you occupied us, you'd be home by now.
LATER DOCTOR: Yes, I've had dealings with your lot before. I can't say I'm a fan.
LATER PRENTIS: No, we do tend to antagonise!
(Later O'Donnell smiles at the Star Wars joke on Prentis's business card. Bennett gets up and the Doctor wrestles him to the ground. O'Donnell hears the thud but sees nothing.)
LATER DOCTOR: What are you doing here?
LATER PRENTIS: Ah, yes. Of course.

[Faraday cage]

CLARA: The dark. The sword. The forsaken. The temple. When we found out what the ghosts were saying, we weren't surprised because the words, they were already inside us.
(Lunn is signing all this for Cass, of course.)
CLARA: But you, you were, weren't you? You didn't know what the words were going to be.
LUNN: Er, no, I didn't. How did you know?
CLARA: Who was the one person who didn't see the writing in the spaceship?
LUNN: Me. Cass wouldn't let me go inside.
CLARA: That's why the ghosts didn't hurt you when they had the chance. The message isn't inside you.
LUNN: Yes, I suppose that makes sense.
CLARA: So you can get the phone back.
LUNN: What?
(Cass queries Lunn.)
LUNN: She's saying I should go and get the phone back.
CASS: No.
CLARA: Listen, listen. I need. We, we need to be able to contact the Doctor and you are the only one who can do this.
LUNN: Okay
(Cass grabs Lunn by the lapels and signs at him very fiercely while Clara checks if the coast is clear.)
LUNN: No, she's right. Neither of you can get it back.
(Cass signs again.)
CLARA: What? What is it? What did she say?
LUNN: It doesn't matter.
CLARA: Please.
LUNN: She said to ask you whether travelling with the Doctor changed you, or were you always happy to put other people's lives at risk.
CLARA: He taught me to do what has to be done. You should get going.
(Clara opens the Faraday cage door.)

[Outside the Church]

(The Doctor and Bennett watch their other selves walk away, and Prentis go into the spaceship. They stand, and the Doctor sees that he has torn his coat in their brief struggle.)
DOCTOR: Oh. I need more time. It's too soon. I haven't saved her yet. Tick tock, tick tock, tick tock, tick tock, tick tock. I've got no choice now, I have to face the Fisher King. You, back to the Tardis.

[Outside the Faraday cage]

(Lunn sets off down the corridor.)
CLARA: Look, he'll be fine, I promise.
(Cass signs at her, short and angry.)
CLARA: Okay. Didn't need anyone to translate that.
(She rejoins Cass in the cage and closes the door.)

[Outside the Church]

(The Doctor stops outside the Church.)
DOCTOR: Now I'm ready.

[Basement]

(It's not a real church, but an old warehouse or similar with Orthodox Christian crosses on the roof. He goes down a metal staircase to a storage area with metal support posts. The open suspended animation chamber is here.)
DOCTOR: I've come from the future. I've seen the chaos you cause. The bloodshed.
FISHER KING [OC]: Tell me what you have seen.
DOCTOR: Ghosts.
FISHER KING [OC]: Ghosts?
DOCTOR: Souls wrenched from the dead. Repeating directions to here, to this spot, over and over.
FISHER KING [OC]: How many ghosts do I create? How many!
DOCTOR: Four that I know of. Maybe five by now. Probably more since I left.
FISHER KING [OC]: My ghosts will make more ghosts. Enough to bring an armada. Enough to wake me from my sleep.
(Back in the future, the suspended animation chamber in the main hangar suddenly activates. Lunn finds the four ghosts having a conference. They notice him and surround him. Lunn closes his eyes and stands very still as they study him closely. When they stand back, he opens his eyes and walks slowly on.)
(Stomping.)
DOCTOR: What will happen when your people arrive?
FISHER KING [OC]: We will drain the oceans and put the humans in chains.
DOCTOR: This world is protected, by me.
FISHER KING [OC]: Yes. One man, lost in time.

[Mess hall]

(Lunn finds the phone on a table. But when he grabs it and turns to run out.)
COMPUTER: Door emergency security lock.
(The door slams in his face. The ghosts walk past.)

[Basement]

FISHER KING: The seed of their destruction is already sown. They will die. The message will be sent. My people will come, and you will do nothing to stop it, Time Lord.
(We finally see him. About three metres tall, with mandibles and spiky plate armour, and holding a large hand weapon. This giant insectoid is not the Wounded King who guarded the Grail in the legends any more than the Bors we met earlier was the gallant survivor of the Quest.)

[Faraday cage]

(Cass goes to open the door. Clara stops her.)
CLARA: Hey! No, no, no, no. Cass! Wait, what are you doing? Look, Lunn, he is going to be fine, I promise. We have to stay here. I know that look. I do that look. Okay, fine. But we stick together.
(Cass nods, and they leave, Clara closing the door behind them.)

[Basement]

FISHER KING: Time Lords. Cowardly, vain curators who suddenly remembered they had teeth and became the most warlike race in the galaxy. But you, you!
(The Doctor staggers, bent backwards over the open suspended animation chamber.)
FISHER KING: You are curious. You have seen the words, too. I can hear them tick inside you. But you are still locked in your history. Still slavishly protecting Time. Willing to die rather than change a word of the future.

[Intersection]

CLARA: (sotto) Lunn.
(Clara turns right and doesn't notice that Cass has turned left.)
CLARA: (sotto) Lunn. Lunn. (turns round) Oh, Cass. Cass. Cass. Idiot. I'm an idiot.
(Meanwhile, Cass is being followed by Moran, dragging a heavy fire axe. She cannot hear him, of course. but she is wary.)

[Basement]

FISHER KING: You will be a strong beacon. How many ghosts can I make of you?
DOCTOR: You know, you've got a lot in common with the Tivoleans. You'll both do anything to survive. They'll surrender to anyone. You will hijack other people's souls and turn them into electromagnetic projections. That will to endure. That refusal to ever cease. It's extraordinary. And it makes a fella think. Because you know what? If all I have to do to survive is tweak the future a bit, what's stopping me? Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. The ripple effect. Maybe it will mean that the universe will be ruled by cats or something, in the future. But the way I see it, even a ghastly future is better than no future at all. You robbed those people of their deaths, made them nothing more than a message in a bottle. You violated something more important than Time. You bent the rules of life and death. So I am putting things straight. Here, now, this is where your story ends.
(The Fisher King growls.)

[Corridor]

(Back in the main hangar, the suspended animation chamber is counting down to opening. Moran is catching up with Cass. A sixth sense makes her squat and place her hand flat on the floor. She feels the vibrations of the scraping axe, stands, turns and runs through Moran as he swings the axe. He vanishes and the axe falls. Cass runs into Clara.)
CLARA: Oh, there you are.
(Cass grabs her hand and they run.)

[Basement]

FISHER KING: There is nothing you can do.
(The Fisher King aims his big energy weapon at the Doctor.)
DOCTOR: I've already done it. The words have gone. I got rid of them. The future I saw, none of that will happen now. The message will never contaminate my friends. No one will die. No one is coming to save you. That's the thing about knowing you're going to die. You've got nothing left to lose.
(The Fisher King pushes the Doctor aside and stomps away.)

[Mess hall]

(Cass and Clara enter.)
LUNN: No, no, you've got to get out of here. The ghosts locked me in. It's a trap.
(The five ghosts all walk through the walls.)
CLARA: Come on. Faraday cage now! 

[Spaceship]

(The Fisher King leaves the Church and stomps into the spaceship. The symbols are still on the bulkhead.)
FISHER KING: The Time Lord lied.
(One of the power cells is missing. It is over by the dam at the back of the town, beeping away its count-down. The Fisher King leaves the spaceship and sees the explosion. He watches cracks form in the dam.)

[Tardis]

(Bennett is here alone.)
HOLO-DOCTOR: This is security protocol seven one two. The echelon circuit has been activated. Please stow any hand luggage and prepare for departure.
(The Tardis dematerialises.)

[Main hangar]

(Clara, Lunn and Cass run in to avoid the ghosts.)
CLARA: Back, get back.
(They bump up against the suspended animation chamber, which starts clunking as the four human ghosts enter.
Back in 1980. the dam starts to crumble. The Fisher King continues to just stand there until he realises what is going on and roars. He opens his arms wide and the rush of water carries him off at speed. 
In the now, the suspended animation chamber opens and the Doctor sits up, wearing his sonic sunglasses. He takes them off.)
DOCTOR: Don't kiss me. Morning breath.
CLARA: Doctor?
(He leaps out of the chamber.)
DOCTOR: Follow me.

[Bridge]

(The Doctor puts his shades earpiece into a handy socket on a console. The Fisher King's roar is heard.)
CLARA: What's that noise?
DOCTOR: It's the call of the Fisher King. The call of their master.
(The four human ghosts turn around at the sound and walk through a wall.)
CLARA: Where are they going?
(They watch on CCTV as all the ghosts walk into the Faraday cage, where the Doctor ghost is creating the Fisher King roar. The Doctor remotely closes the door and the Doctor ghost flickers out of existence.
Later -)
CLARA: (wearing the sunglasses) So what was it? Your ghost.
DOCTOR: A hologram. Like the one we made of you to lure the ghosts into the Faraday cage. With a soupon of artificial intelligence, and a few pre-recorded phrases thrown in.
(Clara is about to take the glasses off, but he slaps her hands.)
DOCTOR: Ah!
(Then he removes them.)
DOCTOR: All beamed from the sonic glasses.
(Clara gets up and Cass takes her place. The Doctor puts the glasses on her.)
DOCTOR: As soon as you brought me and the chamber on board, it connected with the base's wi-fi and Bob's your uncle, you've got a ghost Doctor.
CLARA: Why did they only come out at night?
DOCTOR: Because they're electromagnetic projections that were out of phase with the base's day mode. Right.
(He takes his shades off Cass.)
DOCTOR: That's it. I've erased the memory of the writing. Though you might find you've lost a couple of other memories too. You know, like people you went to school with, or previous addresses or how to drink liquids. That's you two done. Where's Bennett?

[Outside the Faraday cage]

(The ghosts are walking about inside, occasionally looking at Bennett.)
BENNETT: What will happen to them?
DOCTOR: UNIT will cut out the Faraday cage with them inside and take it away. Then the space-hearse will be destroyed, so the writing doesn't infect anyone else.
BENNETT: What do I do now?
DOCTOR: I don't understand.
CLARA: I do. You keep going. You have to. Take it from me, there is a whole world out there. A galaxy, a life. What would O'Donnell have wanted?
DOCTOR: I need to erase that message from your mind, but it's fine, I'll do it later.
(The Doctor walks a little way back down the corridor.)
BENNETT: Lunn. Will you translate something to Cass for me?
LUNN: Of course.
BENNETT: Tell her that you're in love with her and that you always have been.
LUNN: What?
BENNETT: Tell her there is no point wasting time because things happen and then it's too late. Tell her I wish someone had given me that advice.
(Cass queries Lunn and he passes on the message. Cass looks quizzically at Bennett.)
LUNN: Oh, God, no. I was just passing on what he said. Please, don't feel
(Cass grabs Lunn and kisses him.)

[Tardis]

CLARA: What will UNIT do with the ghosts?
DOCTOR: Drag the cage into space, away from the Earth's magnetic field. With nothing to sustain them, the ghosts will eventually fade away.
CLARA: Here's what I don't understand. You did change the future. You stopped the Fisher King from returning.
DOCTOR: The Fisher King had been dead for a hundred and fifty years before we even got here. But once I went back, I became part of events. But here's the thing. The messages my ghost gave, they weren't for you, they were for me. That list. Everyone after you was random, but you being the next name, that's what made me confront the Fisher King.
CLARA: And saying the chamber will open?
DOCTOR: That was me telling me to get inside and when to set it for.
CLARA: Smart.
DOCTOR: Except that's not why I said them.
CLARA: How do you mean?
DOCTOR: I programmed my ghost to say them because that's what my ghost had said. And the only reason I created my ghost hologram in the first place was because I saw it here. I was reverse engineering the narrative.
CLARA: Okay, that's still pretty smart.
DOCTOR: You do not understand. When did I first have those ideas, Clara?
CLARA: Well, it must have been (penny drops) Wow.
DOCTOR: Exactly. Who composed Beethoven's Fifth?
(The Doctor looks at us, shrugs and smiles.)


(Clara is breathing heavily in her spacesuit.)
CLARA: Doctor! Doctor!
DOCTOR [OC]: Yes, you're the very next thing on the list.
(Bits explode in the Tardis.)
CLARA: Doctor, help me!
(Clara is floating untethered in deep space.)
DOCTOR [OC]: Clara, I'm under attack from four and a bit battle fleets

[Tardis / Space]

DOCTOR: In case you think I'm slacking.
CLARA: Doctor, I think there's something in my space suit.
DOCTOR: Yes, that's possible, actually. You were too long in the spider mines.
CLARA: Okay, explain?
DOCTOR: It's possibly a Love Sprite. Sucks your brain (boom) sucks your brain out through your mouth, hence the name.
CLARA: It's halfway up my leg.
DOCTOR: Don't worry, it's just hungry.
CLARA: Doctor
DOCTOR: Describe the four most interesting stars you can see.
CLARA: There's a blue one, quite big. Two little yellowish ones just below.
DOCTOR: Colour of whisky, smaller one blinking?
CLARA: Yes! It's on the back of my neck, I can feel it.
DOCTOR: Great! I thought asphyxiation would kill you first. Can you see a nebula? Can you see a nebula in a sort of wing-shape? Bit green at the end?
CLARA: Yes! Yes, I can.
DOCTOR: Great, I've seen it too. I wondered where it was.
(The Tardis dematerialises.)
CLARA: Doctor! Doctor!

[Tardis]

(And re-materialises around her as the Doctor pulls off her helmet and stomps on the Love Sprite repeatedly. Clara coughs.)
CLARA: How did we do?
DOCTOR: Oh, not a word about my spot-on materialisation skills.
CLARA: What about all the Velosians? Are they safe?
DOCTOR: Huh? Oh, yeah. Well, I lured their attackers halfway across the universe and drained their weapons banks. Not to mention, I also saved a school teacher from having her brains devoured and being asphyxiated in deep space. So, now, if you don't mind, I'm going to go outside and wipe my boot on the grass.

[Forest]

(Night. The crickets are chirping.)
CLARA: What's to stop them re-arming and trying again?
DOCTOR: Nothing. But the Velosians will be ready for them this time. It's the best I could do, Clara. I'm not actually the police, that's just what it says on the box.
CLARA: You're always talking about what you can and can't do but you never tell me the rules.
DOCTOR: We're time travellers. We tread softly. It's okay to make ripples, but not tidal waves.
CLARA: You are a tidal wave.
DOCTOR: Don't say that.
(Swords are drawn and placed against their throats. Flaming torches come into view.)
CLARA: Doctor?
DOCTOR: No, no, not Vikings. I'm not in the mood for Vikings.
(The raiding party leader, a red-haired man with the biggest horns on his helmet, whom I am assuming is the one called Nollarr in the cast list despite never being named, and some of his men actually have bull horns on their helmets.)
NOLLARR: You're coming with us.
DOCTOR: No, I'm not. Do you want to know why?
(The Vikings make angry noises.)
DOCTOR: On my face, right now, more advanced technology than your species will manage over the next nine million years.
(Nollarr snatches the sunglasses off the Doctor's face and snaps them in two. They fall to the ground, sparking.)
DOCTOR: Clara?
CLARA: Yeah?
DOCTOR: We're going with the Vikings.

[Village]

(Played by Cosmeston Mediaeval Village, Penarth. A longship has beached in a small cove near a settlement of wooden framed low buildings with big thatched roofs. A very large metal horn is sounded and the villagers greet their returning heroes. The Doctor and Clara are in manacles. A girl in boy's clothes runs up. The Viking raid leader is wearing half the sonic sunglasses like an eye-patch.)
ASHILDR: You're back! All of you! Are all of you back?
NOLLARR: I suppose so, I haven't counted.
HASTEN: I'm back!
(Another unnamed-in-the-broadcast-but-listed-in-the-cast younger Viking hugs the girl.)
ASHILDR: I had a dream you'd all died. It was so real, I thought I'd made it happen.
NOLLARR: Well, if it ever does, I'm sure you'll a find some way to blame yourself.
(The Chieftain throws the sunglasses to Ashildr.)
ASHILDR: I wish none of you had to go!
CLARA: Plan, Doctor? Any time soon.
DOCTOR: I do have a plan.
CLARA: Yeah, so you keep saying for two days on a longboat.
DOCTOR: Well, only because you were looking worried.
CLARA: Only because you kept saying I do have a plan.
DOCTOR: I do have a plan.
CLARA: There you go.
(They walk past Ashildr. The Doctor stops briefly and stares at her, then the warriors move them on.)
CLARA: You all right? Do you know her?
DOCTOR: Never seen her before in my life.
CLARA: Okay, so, why are you staring?
DOCTOR: I don't know. Nothing, probably. Too much time travel, it happens.
CLARA: What happens?
DOCTOR: People talk about premonition as if it's something strange. It's not. It's just remembering in the wrong direction.
CLARA: Okay, plan.
DOCTOR: We meet the boss man and we do the usual.
CLARA: Which is?
DOCTOR: Replace him.
NOLLARR: Father
(The Vikings greet the white-bearded village Elder, and they talk under the dialogue.)
CLARA: (sotto) How?
DOCTOR: To the primitive mind, advanced technology can seem like magic.
CLARA: It's going to be the yo-yo again, isn't it?
DOCTOR: Yeah. It's in my pocket somewhere.
NOLLARR: We have travelled far and fought
(The Doctor holds up his manacles, that are no longer securing him, and the yellow yo-yo.)
CLARA: How did you do that?!
DOCTOR: Magic.
NOLLARR: Miracle, and much treasure.
(The Doctor throws his manacles in the air, and they hit the old man in the chest. Swords and axes are drawn.)
NOLLARR: How dare you attack our Chieftain!
DOCTOR: I am very, very cross with you. I am very disappointed. I have taken human form to walk among you.
NOLLARR: Who are you, old man?
DOCTOR: Do you not recognise the sign of Odin?
(He unleashes his yo-yo.)
NOLLARR: You are not Odin, and that is not Odin's sign.
DOCTOR: Oh, and you would know that how, exactly? Have you met Odin? Do you know what Odin looks like?
(There is a thunderclap and the sound of a horn. A giant face appears in the clouds in the sky wearing a winged helmet and a Virtual Reality eyepiece.)
ODIN: Oh, my people. I am Odin. And now your day of reward has finally dawned.
DOCTOR: Do not believe this foolish trickery!
(His yo-yo fails to reel itself back up its string.)
DOCTOR: It's supposed to do that.
ODIN: Your mightiest warriors will feast with me tonight in the halls of Valhalla.
(Rays of light teleport down five large beings covered in armour, They have alien guns. The Doctor and Clara back away quietly while the Vikings move forward, and the aliens stomp to meet them.)
DOCTOR: Stay still. Stay very, very still.
CLARA: That's not really Odin, is it?
DOCTOR: He hasn't even got a yo-yo.
CLARA: So this is an invasion.
DOCTOR: Shh. No, this is a harvest. The strongest, the fittest. The weak and young, they'll leave behind.
(An alien warrior scans a group, then knocks down the village blacksmith, who comes up with a green outline instead of red. Then a batch of fighters are teleported away.)
CLARA: We have to help them.
DOCTOR: We have to not get chosen.
(Clara runs over to Ashildr.)
DOCTOR: Clara. Clara, no!
CLARA: Have you still got the eye-patch thing?
DOCTOR: (sotto) Clara.
CLARA: Point it at my chains and think the word open. Say it with your mind.
(As Ashildr does so, more groups are teleported, then the aliens turn towards Clara and Ashildr, and register the technology.)
DOCTOR: Clara! Clara!
(An alien points his 'gun' at the women, there is a bang and Clara's shackles fall to the ground, empty. Then the aliens teleport themselves away and the face in the sky disappears.)

[Spaceship]

(Fluorescent lights flicker on. Ashildr and Clara are greeted by one of the younger Vikings.)
HASTEN: Welcome to Valhalla, my ladies.
(Nollarr forces the door open with his axe. At the end of a short passage with circular fans running along the walls is another door. He walks towards it.)
CLARA: No, wait! Wait!
NOLLARR: There's nothing to fear, strange maiden.
(Fan blades begin to  turn very quickly.)
NOLLARR: We are Odin's chosen.
(He is caught by energy discharges in the passage, from the fans and disappears. Just his helmet and axe are left behind. Machinery thuds as if cogs are moving into position, then the wall behind them begins to move forward.)
HASTEN: The wall, it moves!
ASHILDR: Odin! Odin!
CLARA: Use your blades, try to jam it!
(While the men try this futile exercise, Clara grabs Ashildr and they run for the other door.)
CLARA: Come on! Come on!
(They make it, and try to prise the door open.)
CLARA: Quick! Pull!
ASHILDR: I'm trying!
CLARA: Quickly!
(The Vikings are finally forced into the passage, and the fans start turning again.)

[Village]

(The Doctor is admiring a finely carved dragon figurehead.)
LOFTY: They took half the village.
(A man with his long blond beard in two plaits, who the Doctor will give this stupid name to later, speaks.)
HEIDI: Yeah, and it was the good half.
EINARR: They went willingly to Valhalla as would we all.
HEIDI: I wouldn't. Well, I wouldn't. I'm not good with heights.
DOCTOR: Oh, stop it! All of you, stop it right now. Homo sapiens, you're an intelligent species. Stop lying to yourselves.
EINARR: Choose your words carefully, False Odin.
DOCTOR: Yes, I am a false Odin. That's exactly right, I lied. The big fella in the sky, he lied too. You all know it. Because what's the one thing that gods never do? Gods never actually show up!
Guess what? You got raided. Guess what else? I lost someone who matters to me.
EINARR: So did I.

[Spaceship]

(A processing plant area of some kind. Vials are being filled with green liquid.)
CLARA: Ssh!
(The warrior's helmets and weapons are in a pile on the floor..)
ASHILDR: Why are we still alive?
ODIN: Because of this.
(He is holding the half of the sonic sunglasses carefully by an earpiece.)
ODIN: Explain.
CLARA: I'm sorry. I didn't mean to make you afraid.
ODIN: I have no reason to fear you.
CLARA: Except you've already analysed that and you know it's a technology from a civilisation vastly more powerful than your own. And er, you will have also noticed that I'm wearing a space suit. So, I'm not from around here, and it's highly unlikely I will have come alone. You see, you haven't killed us because killing us would start a fight you didn't come here to have, and you're not sure you can win.
(An armoured alien stomps past her and hands Odin a vial.)
CLARA: Ooo, hello. Time for your medication?
ODIN: Adrenaline. Testosterone extracted from the finest warriors.
(Odin drinks it.)
ODIN: Ah! Nectar.
(He gives the empty vial back to the alien.)
CLARA: Okay, you mash up Vikings to make warrior juice, nice.
ASHILDR: They what?
CLARA: Why play God?
ODIN: What is a god but the cattle's name for farmer? What is heaven but the gilded door of the abattoir?
CLARA: You're not a farmer. You're a thief, caught in the act.
ASHILDR: I don't understand. Mashed up? What are you saying?
CLARA: Hush. Go, now. Go and find Vikings on other planets. The universe is full of testosterone. Trust me, it's unbearable. We won't follow you, see? We don't need to fight.
ODIN: War is our way.
CLARA: Ask yourself, is this a war you really want?
ASHILDR: Yes! You'll pay for what you have done here today. I am a Viking. Ashildr, daughter of Einarr. You have mocked our gods. Killed our warriors. And we will crush you on the field of battle.
ODIN: That's better!
CLARA: We were about to leave.
ODIN: You almost had me talking. Talk is for cowards.
CLARA: No, no, no, listen to me.
ODIN: I accept your challenge.
ASHILDR: We will crush you!
CLARA: (sotto) Oh, please. Shut up.
ODIN: Shall we say this time tomorrow? Ten of my warriors versus the best of your village.
ASHILDR: You will beg for mercy!
ODIN: (laughs) I will send you back. You can inform your people of their impending destruction.
CLARA: Why are you doing this?
ODIN: Why else? The joy of war! Can't you see it on my face?
(He presses a button on his bracer, and the humanoid face disappears to reveal something else.)

[Village]

(Clara and Ashildr are teleported back while the Doctor is doing some reading.)
DOCTOR: Clara?
EINARR: My child!
DOCTOR: Clara! Clara! Clara!
(He runs over then just sticks out his upraised thumb.)
DOCTOR: I'm not a hugger. Ahh! Let's hug!
(He lifts Clara off her feet.)
CLARA: No!
EINARR: Where are the others?
ASHILDR: I'm sorry, Father.
DOCTOR: I looked them up in my two thousand year diary.
CLARA: Okay.
DOCTOR: They are called the Mire.
CLARA: Listen
DOCTOR: They are one of the deadliest warrior races in the entire galaxy
CLARA: Okay.
DOCTOR: But they're practical. They get what they want and go. You persuaded them to go, didn't you? I knew that you would.
CLARA: The deadliest warrior race in the galaxy?
DOCTOR: One of them, yes. Why?
CLARA: Because I think this village just declared war on them.

[Meeting House]

(Clara is out of her spacesuit at last. They are in a longhouse with a series of cartwheel chandlers holding candle stubs hanging the length of the roof. These are accessible from a gallery decorated with painted round wooden shields.)
CLARA: They're coming here tomorrow, ten of them, to kill everybody in the village.
EINARR: Ashildr, is this true?
ASHILDR: It's my fault.
EINARR: Not every misfortune that befalls this village is down to you. (to the Doctor) She thinks she brings us bad luck.
DOCTOR: What bad luck? You haven't had any bad luck. You're fine.
(A stocky man who gets named later by the Doctor remonstrates.)
LIMPY: We are about to be attacked by
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, yes, yes. With a whole day to spare! So leave! Hop it, take off! Into the woods, split up, hide. Hang about there for a week, come back home, make puddings and babies. That's basically what you do, isn't it?
EINARR: We cannot leave this village.
DOCTOR: Yes, you can. Just pick a direction. Fly like a bird, run like a nose. That's probably a Viking saying, I haven't checked that.
LIMPY No. We will fight!
ALL: Aye!
DOCTOR: Really? Well, I don't know if you remember, but they actually took away all your fighters. So, what are you? Farmers, fishermen, web designers. Maybe not that last one.
(Einarr tosses a skin full of weapons onto the floor.)
EINARR: We are Vikings!
(Cheers)
DOCTOR: Okay, tell me this. How many people here have actually held a sword in battle? By a show of hands? Mmm hmm. Yeah, baby.
(He raises his own hand. Clara raises hers too. The Doctor picks up a sword.)
DOCTOR: The Mire are coming for each and every one of you. (throws the sword down again) So what you going to do? Raise crops at them?
LIMPY: If necessary.
HEIDI: I think he was being sarcastic.
EINARR: We're not cowards. We do not run. A death in battle is a death with honour.
ALL: Aye!
(A baby cries.)
DOCTOR: Do babies die with honour?
(The Doctor closes his eyes and concentrates.)
DOCTOR: I am afraid, Mother. Hold me, Mother. I am afraid.
CLARA: Er, he speaks Baby.
DOCTOR: Turn your face towards me, Mother, for you're, you're beautiful. And I will sing for you. I am afraid, but I will sing. Babies think that laughter is singing. Did you know that? I applaud your courage, but I deplore your stupidity. And I will mourn your deaths, which will be terrifying, painful, and without honour.
(The Doctor starts to leave, but Ashildr stops him.)
ASHILDR: Stay. You could help us. I know you could.
DOCTOR: I told you to run. That's all the help you need. And that's all the help you're getting.
(The Doctor walks outside.)

[Village]

(Clara goes to the Doctor.)
DOCTOR: The earth is safe, humanity is not in danger. It's just one village.
CLARA: Just one village?
DOCTOR: Suppose I saved it by some miracle. No Tardis, no sonic. Just one village defeats the Mire. What then? Word gets around. Earth becomes a target of strategic value, and the Mire come back. And God knows what else. Ripples into tidal waves until everybody dies.
(The baby is crying.)
CLARA: What's it saying?
DOCTOR: She. She's afraid. Babies sense danger. They have to.
CLARA: Tell me.
DOCTOR: Mother, I hear thunder. Mother, I hear shouting. You are my world, but I hear other worlds now. Beyond the unfolding of your smile, is there other kindness? I'm afraid. Will they be kind? The sky is crying now. Fire in the water. Fire in the water?
(The crying stops. Clara puts her hand on the Doctor's cheek.)
CLARA: You just decided to stay. The baby stopped crying.
(Later, the remaining men are lined up. They are holding wooden staves and there are practise dummies nearby.)
DOCTOR: So, when I say move, you move. When I say jump, you say how high? Unless it's across a gap of some kind which, of course, means you jump horizontally. Yes, what is it, Lofty?
LOFTY: Sorry, my name's not actually Lofty, it's Bro
DOCTOR: No, it's not, it's Lofty. I've got too much to think about without everybody having their own names, so it's Lofty. You're Lofty, you're Daphne, (bushy black beard) you're Noggin the Nog, (old man in a too-large helmet) ZZ Top (bushy ginger beard and bald head) and you're er,  Heidi. So, we'll try that again. Lofty, what is it?
LOFTY: Sorry, sir, it's just, why aren't we practising with real swords?
DOCTOR: Yes, perhaps you'd like to field this one, Limpy?
(The stocky man sitting is apart, tying a bandage around his knee.)
LIMPY: Because we can't be trusted with them.
DOCTOR: That's right, yes. You'll be given your real swords back when you can prove that you can wave them around without lopping bits off yourselves. Heidi, why are your eyes closed?
HEIDI: Sorry, sir. Just not that good with the sight of blood.
(He gestures towards Limpy.)
DOCTOR: No of course you're not.
(The women are watching from a safe distance.)
ASHILDR: Swords against those creatures. That won't work, will it?
CLARA: He's just warming up. He hasn't got a plan yet. But he will have, and it will be spectacular.
(Finally the Doctor holds up his sword and whistles for attention.)
DOCTOR: Enough theory. I'm handing out the real swords.
(Later, the village horn is being sounded and everyone is rushing around with buckets of water and a thatch is on fire.)
DOCTOR: Well, that could have gone better.
(Heidi groans and sits up.)
DOCTOR: Morning.
HEIDI: What happened?
DOCTOR: The Big Bang, dinosaurs, bipeds, and a mounting sense of futility.
CLARA: More recently, Chuckles hit Lofty over the head, on his helmet, with his sword, which knocked him out. There was a little blood, which you saw (Heidi faints) and did that. Only, the first time you did it, you knocked a torch onto some hay, which spooked a horse, who kicked open a gate, and er, I'm sure you can fill in the rest.
(Later that night - the Vikings are inside the Meeting House preparing for battle by having a big feast.
The Doctor and Clara are outside listening to booms in the sky. Clara has obtained a jerkin, probably from Ashildr.)
CLARA: Weird sounding thunder.
DOCTOR: That's not thunder. It's the weapon forges of the Mire. They're making sure we hear them.
CLARA: Well?
DOCTOR: Well, Heidi faints at the mention of blood, not just the sight any more. He's actually upgraded his phobia. Chuckles, (he means Einarr) he questions every single order you give him, which is going to be a little bit difficult, a little bit tricky, in the heat of battle.
CLARA: I keep waiting to hear what your real plan is.
DOCTOR: Teaching them to fight, that's the only plan I've got.
CLARA: Turning them into fighters? That's not like you.
DOCTOR: Yeah. I used to believe that too.
CLARA: What happened?
DOCTOR: You.  Oh, Clara Oswald what have I made of you?
CLARA: It doesn't matter how well you train them, it's not going to make difference.
DOCTOR: They'll die fighting with honour. To a Viking, that's all the difference in the world.
CLARA: A good death? Is that the best they can hope for?
DOCTOR: A good death is the best anyone can hope for, unless you happen to be immortal.
(Ashildr leaves the Meeting House.)
ASHILDR: Sorry.
CLARA: No problem.
DOCTOR: Night.
CLARA: You've made an impact there.
DOCTOR: Stop it.
CLARA: She's nice. Fight you for her.
DOCTOR: The human race, you're obsessed. You all need to get a hobby.
CLARA: I've got a hobby, thanks. It's you, by the way.
DOCTOR: Well, get a new one.
CLARA: Not this.
DOCTOR: Tomorrow it's going to be a bloodbath.
CLARA: Don't even ask.
DOCTOR: These people all died hundreds of years before you were born
CLARA: I'm not running.
DOCTOR: I have a duty of care.
CLARA: No, you don't, because I never asked for that.
DOCTOR: Every time we do something like this, I keep thinking, what if something happens to you?
CLARA: Well, stop thinking about me, and start think about them, because you're missing something.
DOCTOR: What?
CLARA: How you're going to win. You always miss it, right up until the last minute. So put down your sword, stop playing soldier and look for it. Start winning, Doctor. It's what you're good at.

[Ashildr's home]

(Ashildr is challenging a shadow cast on a skin by candlelight.)
ASHILDR: So, we meet again, Fake Odin. Valhalla burns around you, your army is destroyed and now it is time for you to die!
(She attacks her model of Odin with a wooden stave. The Doctor stands in the doorway and clears his throat.)
ASHILDR: How long have you been there?
DOCTOR: What's that? Is that a puppet? Oh, I love puppets!
ASHILDR: I make puppets sometimes, when I'm
DOCTOR: Frightened?
ASHILDR: When the raiding parties go out, I make up stories about their battles.
DOCTOR: Because if you make up the right story, then you think it will keep them safe and they'll all come home. That's okay. You're not the first person to ever have done that.
ASHILDR: Why are you here?
DOCTOR: I'm looking for something I'm missing. What do you think our chances are tomorrow?
ASHILDR: We will be cut down like corn. By this time tomorrow, every single one of us will be dead.
DOCTOR: Yeah.
(He picks up an illuminated bound book and briefly leaves through it.)
DOCTOR: You could go.
ASHILDR: There's nowhere for me except here. This is my place. The sky, the hills, the sea, the people. Is there nowhere like that for you?
DOCTOR: Oh, I like a nice view as much as anyone.
ASHILDR: But?
DOCTOR: Can't wait for the next one.
ASHILDR: I pity you.
DOCTOR: I will mourn for you. I know which I'd prefer.
ASHILDR: You think they're all idiots, don't you?
DOCTOR: What, you mean the rest of the universe? Basically, yes, I do.
ASHILDR: But they're kind and brave, and strong, and I love them.
DOCTOR: Good. Good. But that won't save you.
ASHILDR: I've always been different. All my life I've known that. The girls all thought I was a boy. The boys all said I was just a girl. My head is always full of stories. I know I'm strange. Everyone  knows I'm strange. But here I'm loved. You tell me to run to save my life. I tell you that leaving this place would be death itself.
(Her father enters.)
EINARR: I cannot keep you safe. I do not have the strength. But I will try to till the last beat of my heart.
(The baby cries as Einarr hugs Ashildr.)
EINARR: If you seek to mock me in this moment
DOCTOR: No. No. No, you go ahead and you cry all you like. Speaking of crying, is that baby getting closer?
(Lofty walks through the village carrying the baby.)
DOCTOR: Why has Lofty stolen a baby?
ASHILDR: That's his child.
DOCTOR: Oh. Where's he taking her?
ASHILDR: The boathouse. He takes her to the boathouse when she won't settle. She likes the fish.
DOCTOR: Why would she? Fire in the water. Fire in the water. Fire in the Fire in the water. Fire in the water? Fire in the water! That's it. That's it. That's what I've been missing. Clara, I've found it!
(He runs out.)
DOCTOR: Clara! Clara!

[Boathouse]

(The baby is crying and the water is lapping. For no obvious reason, these Vikings keep water here in large barrels.)
DOCTOR: Lofty! I had no idea that was your baby. Hello, baby, I had no idea this was your junior parent.
LOFTY: I'm trying to settle her. She likes all the fish.
(Clara, Ashildr and Einarr enter.)
CLARA: You're shouting. What's happened? Did you trap your finger in something again?
DOCTOR: Chuckles, bedtime is cancelled. Everybody, off the hard stuff. We've got a long night's work ahead of us. I need a blacksmith. Who's the blacksmith?
LOFTY: I'm the blacksmith.
DOCTOR: You're the blacksmith and you've got a baby too? He's been at it hammer and tongs.
CLARA: Doctor, explain. What's happening?
DOCTOR: There's going to be a war tomorrow. And here's some news, this just in. We're going to win the hell out of it.
CLARA: How?
DOCTOR: Ashildr, this is your village, and you will never have to leave it, I swear.
CLARA: Seriously, how?
DOCTOR: I told you that we were basically doomed. Did no one in this two-horn town think to mention that you had eels?
CLARA: Eels?
DOCTOR: I give you fire in the water!
(Flashes of blue light in the barrels of water. Why?)
DOCTOR: Electric eels!
(My query stands. What are electric fish from the Amazon and Orinoco basins doing in Northern European water barrels? The baby cries, and so do I.)
DOCTOR: Yes, yes! I know exactly how you feel. Well, not exactly. She needs changing.
CLARA: Plan, then?
DOCTOR: And it is a doozy!

[Blacksmith's forge]

(A hive of activity.)
DOCTOR: We need to pull that silvery stuff out of Clara's space suit. We can use it to magnify the electrical charge. Stop looking confused! Look happy! Winning is all about looking happier than the other guy. Always walk briskly. Makes you a moving target. Oh, that's for Lofty. Lofty! (he throws something) And talk with confidence, even if you're terrified.
(Clara is showing 'Heidi' how to use her mobile phone.)
DOCTOR: Act as if you know their plan, and sometimes, if you're very lucky, they'll actually tell you it. Ah, this is for Ashildr. (a blanket)
(Later, the plan is being explained.)
DOCTOR: Then we deploy the anvil. Now, at this stage, getting me one of their helmets is key. We get a helmet, and this is over. Then we can mop up the rest using Ashildr's monstrosity.
(Ashildr pulls on a rope to reveal something to the crowd.)
CLARA: That is rubbish.
DOCTOR: (grinning) I know.

[Meeting House]

(Next day, the village appears deserted. Odin teleports down with his ten warriors. They stomp towards the meeting house and discover Lofty playing horseshoes while the villagers are dancing. Once they enter, Lofty moves behind them and throws metal rings with copper wiring attached to them over the aerials sticking out of the Mire's backpack.)
DOCTOR: Hey, hello, hi! I'm the Doctor. It's lovely to meet you face to er convincing hologram. You could always go zzz and get rid of it, no? No, on second thoughts, don't. That, that, that suits you.
ODIN: It is time to fight.
DOCTOR: No, no, no. We decided against that. We thought we'd just have a party!
(The villagers cheer.)
ODIN: Let me put it another way. You fight or you die.
DOCTOR: We're unarmed. There isn't a single weapon in this room. Which I'm sure your systems are telling you. You wouldn't open fire on unarmed civilians, would you?
ODIN: It wouldn't be the first time.
(A horseshoe hits a Mire's armour with a clang. The Mire all look up to a mesh of wires attached to the cartwheels of candle holders in the roof space.)
DOCTOR: Chuckles, now!
(Einarr hits a barrel of eels. Electricity runs through wires from the boathouse to the Mire, and causes havoc.)
DOCTOR: Run, run, run-run-run-run! That's four down, six left.
ODIN: Go!
(Mire stomp forward.)
DOCTOR; Chuckles, switch!
(Einarr hits another barrel of electric eels and energises another set of wires. The Mire's weapons are attracted to the magnetised anvil in the roof, then their helmets. These are not pretty aliens, and they have over-large mouths filled with very long sharp teeth.)
DOCTOR: Chuckles, off!
(Everything falls to the floor. The Doctor catches a helmet and Clara grabs a weapon.)
CLARA: Don't move.
ODIN: Go!
(The Mire chase the villagers while the Doctor and Clara hide, and he works on the helmet.)
CLARA: How's it coming?
DOCTOR: Reversing the polarity of the neutron flow. I bet that means something. It sounds great. Ashildr!
(Ashildr sits in a large chair.)
DOCTOR: Are you ready?
ASHILDR: I'm scared.
DOCTOR: You were born for this. Show them a story they'll never forget.
(The Doctor puts a Mire helmet on Ashildr. Odin gasps as the main doors of the Meeting House fall in and a strong wind blows out the candles. They see a classic long-necked Wyrm coming at them, hissing.)
ODIN: What is this beast? It's impossible!
MIRE: Withdraw. Withdraw.
ODIN: Stand and fight!
(The Wyrm snaps at them. The Mire's weapons have no effect on it.)
MIRE: Withdraw. (transports up)
DOCTOR: See how they run.
MIRE: Withdraw. (transports up)
ODIN: Cowards!
MIRE: Withdraw.
(The Mire finish transporting back to the spaceship, leaving Odin alone.)
DOCTOR: That's enough, Ashildr. Story's over. Happy ending.
(The dragon flickers in Odin's VR eyepiece out to reveal Ashildr's monstrosity, created with the longship dragon prow from earlier. Limpy stops blowing the village horn with a sound like a fart, then laughs. The Meeting House door is raised shut and other villagers surround Odin with swords, pointy end towards him.)
ODIN: What trickery is this?
DOCTOR: Ha! Says the man with a fake face. But you see, that's the trouble with viewing reality through technology. It's all too easy to feed in a new reality.
CLARA: You got it? Great.
(Clara takes the phone from Heidi.)
DOCTOR: A story to save a town, and a puppet from a nightmare. You see, you've just seen the world through the eyes of a storyteller. The mighty armies of the Mire. Brutal, sadistic, undefeated. Even I believed the stories. But after today, no one will again. An army like yours, it lives or dies on its reputation, its story. And today, you were sent packing by a handful of farmers and fisherman. Not to mention the whole wetting your pants and running away from a puppet debacle.
CLARA: (laughing) See, that was really funny.
DOCTOR: That was hilarious. It's just lucky that nobody recorded that. Oh. Wait a minute, we did.
(He watches it on Clara's phone.)
CLARA: See, all it needed was the Benny Hill theme.
DOCTOR: The Benny Hill theme, yes. Now, you see, we could just keep this as a funny little film and play it every year at the Christmas party, or I could upload it to the galactic hub and get a second opinion. So the question you need to ask yourself is this. Just how important is your reputation to you? Here's a little sneak preview, piped straight into your helmets, free of charge.
(Clara presses a big red virtual button on her phone screen. We watch Odin and his Mire backing away from the puppet, shouting in fear to a background of Yakety-Sax by Rich and Randolph.)
ODIN [OC]: Wait! Cowards!
DOCTOR: If you don't leave right now, I'll put it out there for all to see and no one will fear you again.
ODIN: This humiliation will not go unpunished. We will meet again.
(The Doctor teleports him away.)
DOCTOR: Oh, I hacked your teleporter. Sorry.
(Celebrations. The Mire spaceship appears in the sky and rockets away. Einarr goes to where Ashildr is still sitting in the chair, wearing the Mire helmet.)
EINARR: You did it, Ashildr. You did it. You saved us all. Ashildr.
(Ashildr doesn't move. They all go quiet.)
EINARR: Ashildr? Ashildr!
CLARA: Get the helmet off her. Get it off, now.
(Einarr removes the helmet and drops it with a thud.)
EINARR: Ashildr?
(They lay her down on the floor.)
CLARA: No pulse. I think. Doctor, is she dead?
DOCTOR: I'm sorry. I'm really terribly sorry.
(He runs out.)

[Boathouse]

(Clara finds the Doctor here, looking at his reflection in the barrels.)
CLARA: Heart failure, yeah?
DOCTOR: Yeah. I plugged her into the machine. Used her up like a battery. (sighs) I'm so sick of losing.
CLARA: You didn't lose. You saved the town.
DOCTOR: I don't mean the war. I'll lose any war you like. I'm sick of losing people. Look at you, with your eyes, and your never giving up, and your anger, and your kindness. One day, the memory of that will hurt so much that I won't be able to breathe, and I'll do what I always do. I'll get in my box and I'll run and I'll run, in case all the pain ever catches up. And every place I go, it will be there.
CLARA: You did your best. She died. There's nothing you can do.
DOCTOR: I can do anything. There's nothing I can't do. Nothing. But I'm not supposed to. Ripples, tidal waves, rules.  I'm not supposed to. Oh. Oh!
(He looks at his reflection in the water and sees what he saw in the mirror back in Deep Breath.)
CLARA: What? What's wrong?
DOCTOR: My face. 
DOCTOR [memory]: Who frowned me this face? Why this one? Why did I choose this face?
CLARA: Doctor, what's wrong with your face?
DOCTOR: I think I know why I chose it.
DOCTOR [memory]: It's like I'm trying to tell myself something.
DOCTOR: I think I know what I'm trying to say.
DONNA [memory]: (to Doctor 10) Just someone. Not the whole town. Just save someone.
DOCTOR 10 [memory]: Come with me.
(A memory of Lobus Caecilus cowering as Vesuvius erupts in Fires of Pompeii. Played by Peter Capaldi, if you'd forgotten.)
DOCTOR: I know where I got this face, and I know what it's for.
CLARA: Okay, what's it for?
DOCTOR: To remind me. To hold me to the mark. I'm the Doctor, and I save people.
(He shouts at the sky - the Time Lords.)
DOCTOR: And if anyone happens to be listening, and you've got any kind of a problem with that, to hell with you!

[Meeting House]

(Ashildr is laid out on furs on a bier as the Doctor tosses small components out of the Mire helmet.)
EINARR: What's he doing?
CLARA: Saving her, I think.
(Whirr of sonics, then the Doctor holds out a small SIM-type device.)
DOCTOR: It's from the Mire helmet. Battlefield medical kit. I've reprogrammed it for human beings.
(He places it on Ashildr's forehead and it gets absorbed into her.)
EINARR: It's gone. It's inside her.
DOCTOR: It's repairing her. It will never stop repairing her, if it works. Come on, Ashildr. Come on. The story's not over yet.
EINARR: (weeping and stroking her hair) Daughter, listen to me. This town has lost so much. If we lose you too there'll be nothing left.
(Nothing for a long pause, then Ashildr gasps and opens her eyes briefly.)
EINARR: Ashildr!
DOCTOR: She'll be conscious in a day, up and about in three. No swimming for a week. Now, we're going to need a longboat and some of your best rowers. We're two days' sail from the Tardis.
Come on, Clara.
EINARR: Wait, no. She'll want to see you when she wakes.
DOCTOR: Oh, no. Well, she'll, she'll see me often enough once she understands.
EINARR: Understands what?
DOCTOR: Second dose.
(He throws another SIM card to Einarr.)
EINARR: Will she need to take this?
DOCTOR: No, no, no, it's not for her.
CLARA: Then who's it for?
DOCTOR: Er, whoever she wants.
ASHILDR: (sotto) Doctor, thank you.
DOCTOR: Oh, don't thank me yet, Ashildr. Not yet.
(The Doctor and Clara leave.)

[Forest]

(Walking towards the Tardis.)
CLARA: Okay, it's official. Silence is even worse in a Scottish accent. Are you going to tell me what you're brooding about?
DOCTOR: It won't stop, the repair kit I put inside Ashildr, not ever. It'll just keep fixing her.
CLARA: Well, good.
DOCTOR: I'm not sure, but it's entirely possible she has lost the ability to die.
CLARA: The ability?
DOCTOR: Oh, dying is an ability, believe me. Barring accidents, she may now be functionally immortal.
(He unlocks the Tardis.)
CLARA: If the repair kit never stops working, then why did you give her two?
DOCTOR: Immortality isn't living forever. That's not what it feels like. Immortality is everybody else dying. She might meet someone she can't bear to lose. That happens, I believe.

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: I was angry. I was emotional. Just possibly, I have made a terrible mistake. Maybe even a tidal wave.
(The Tardis dematerialises.)
DOCTOR: Time will tell, it always does.
CLARA: Whatever you did for Ashildr, I think she deserved it.
DOCTOR: Yes. Yes, she did. But Ashildr isn't just human any more. There's a little piece of alien inside her, so in a way, she's. In a way, she's a hybrid.
(After that allusion to the concept introduced in The Witch's Familiar, we are treated to a representation of Ashildr standing against the passing of more time than a normal human would experience without ageing. Days, seasons, years. She stops smiling and becomes stern.)

To Be Continued...


[Woodland]

(Night time. A coach and four is trotting along the track by the light of a full moon when a lone horseman moves into their path.)
COACHMAN: Whoa!
(The masked horseman rears his horse, who neighs. The coach passengers look out, the young lady leaning forward to emphasise her dcolletage.)
HIGHWAYMAN: Stand and deliver!
COACHMAN: Do as he says. I've heard of this brigand. He's known as the Knightmare! Faster than Sam Swift the Quick, deadlier than Deadly Dupont.
HIGHWAYMAN: Dabbling lowpads the pair of 'em, with terrible pseudonyms to boot. Cash bags, jewels, the lot.
FANSHAWE: I will not be robbed by some lone, ranting cavalier!
HIGHWAYMAN: Who says I am alone?
(A pair of bright lights come on in the bushes. Lucie Fanshawe screams.
Meanwhile, also in the forest, the Doctor looks out of the Tardis, then leaves it and starts up a gizmo with a compass on top.)
DOCTOR: Right.
(The gizmo beeps rapidly but softly. As he turns around, a pair of red lights illuminate on stalks sticking out and slightly forward.)
DOCTOR: Warm.
(An orange light comes on in the compass.)
DOCTOR: Warmer.
(The Doctor follows the signal.)
COACHMAN: We are cursed. The Knightmare is in league with the devil.
(The highwayman takes the money and jewels from the Fanshawes.)
HIGHWAYMAN: Aye, Satan's sidekick, me. Where's the rest?
LUCIE: What else would you take from me, sir?
HIGHWAYMAN: You know what I want. Hand over the amulet.
DOCTOR: Hello.
(Consternation as the Doctor has climbed into the coach from the other side.)
FANSHAWE: Ah! Don't shoot!
DOCTOR: Oh, don't mind me, don't mind me. I'm only going to be a minute. Don't worry. Oh, very warm.
HIGHWAYMAN: What are you doing?
DOCTOR: Oh, just ignore me, I'm just passing through, like fish in the night.
HIGHWAYMAN: This is a robbery!
DOCTOR: It's not fish in the night, it's something else.
(The Doctor gets out of the coach and closes the door.)
HIGHWAYMAN: This is my robbery.
DOCTOR: No, ships in the night. Yeah, something like that.
HIGHWAYMAN: Step aside or I shall blow your brains out.
DOCTOR: Sorry, were you talking to me there? Try again. I promise I'll listen this time.
HIGHWAYMAN: You have interrupted my robbery, sir, and you will step away, if you wish to take another breath.
COACHMAN: You're going to get us all killed, if you don't shut your mouth.
DOCTOR: Sorry. Sorry, I really was planning to listen that time but, basically, I didn't. Usually, someone hits me at this point, but she's taking the Year 7s for Taekwondo.
(He follows the gizmo signal.)
DOCTOR: Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh!
(It leads him to the luggage chest at the back of the coach.)
DOCTOR: Yes! Got you! (laughs) Oh, hang on. If I didn't know better, I'd say this was a robbery.
HIGHWAYMAN: I am robbing these people. You are getting out of my way.
DOCTOR: I just need one tiny little thing from out of this box.
HIGHWAYMAN: This is my robbery!
DOCTOR: Well, can't we share it? Isn't that what robbery's all about?
COACHMAN: Yah! Get up!
(The coach drives away at a gallop.)
DOCTOR: Oh, no! No, no, no, no, no, no!
HIGHWAYMAN: You bungled my heist.
DOCTOR: No, you bungled mine, Zorro!
HIGHWAYMAN: Whey-faced fool!
DOCTOR: Yeah, well, why don't you show your face? At least I show my face. What's wrong with yours?
(The Highwayman's masculine voice changes to feminine and recognisable.)
ASHILDR: Nothing, Doctor.
(She dismounts and removes her hat, kerchief and mask.)
DOCTOR: You.
ASHILDR: Yes, it is me. What took you so long, old man?
DOCTOR: Old man?
ASHILDR: It seemed apt. Life expectancy is thirty five these days. Well, for everyone else.
DOCTOR: But didn't you know it was me?
ASHILDR: Of course, you don't forget the man who saved your life. It's good to see you.
DOCTOR: Yes, I didn't get that impression when you were threatening to kill me.
(Ashildr changes voices.)
HIGHWAYMAN: The Knightmare has a reputation to maintain.
DOCTOR: It's a very good voice. How do you do that?
ASHILDR: Practice.
DOCTOR: Last time I saw you, you were founding a leper colony. I was so proud of you.
ASHILDR: Proud of me? You weren't even there.
DOCTOR: Yes, I was. You didn't see me, but I saw you.
ASHILDR: And you just left me there?
DOCTOR: Well, you seemed fine.
ASHILDR: In a leper colony? No matter. You're here now. We should celebrate.
DOCTOR: Oh, no, this isn't a visit, I've got a job to do. I'm here looking for an alien object which has no business being here on Earth in 1651. It was just, it just so happened, you know, that my tracking device, it led me to the carriage that you were, you know, robbing. There wasn't. I didn't. It was a
ASHILDR: You mean, you haven't come for me?
DOCTOR: No. It was just a coincidence.
(A church clock chimes in the distance.)
DOCTOR: Oh, Ashildr, I'm sorry.
ASHILDR: Who's Ashildr?
DOCTOR: You are. That's your name. Ashildr, daughter of Einarr. Chuckles. I used to call him Chuckles. Do you remember?
ASHILDR: Yes. I think I remember the village.
DOCTOR: You loved that village.
ASHILDR: If you say so.
DOCTOR: Anyone in that village would have died for you.
ASHILDR: Well, they're all dead now, and here I am. So, I guess it all worked out.
DOCTOR: Ashildr.
ASHILDR: That's not my name. I don't even remember that name.
DOCTOR: Well, what, what, what do you call yourself?
ASHILDR: Me.
DOCTOR: Yes, you. There's nobody else here.
ASHILDR: No. I call myself Me. All the other names I chose died with whoever knew me. Me is who I am now. No one's mother, daughter, wife. My own companion. Singular. Unattached. Alone. Anyway, I should get started. Jump on, I'll give you a ride. You can help me.
DOCTOR: With what?
ASHILDR: Packing.
(She goes back to her horse.)
ASHILDR: Come on.

[Driveway]

(Walking up to a minor manorial country house.)
DOCTOR: It's a big place for someone who lives on their own.
ASHILDR: I have a servant. And all manner of visitors drop in.
(Someone or something is watching from the bushes, growling softly.)

[Entrance hall]

(They enter through a side door and go along a corridor to where the main staircase comes down.)
ASHILDR: Your device, what is it?
DOCTOR: My curioscanner? Oh, it, er, it sort of scans for, it scans for curios. I've just realising how it got its name. It's been tracking exoplanetary energy for the last couple of weeks. I've been following it across the galaxy.
(Ashildr opens a large chest full of loot.)
ASHILDR: And do you know what you're looking for?
DOCTOR: I've got a pretty good idea, yes. Why?
ASHILDR: I wasn't just robbing Lucie Fanshawe for her loot. She's bragged about having the rarest gem in the land, an ancient amulet from foreign parts. Could it be we are looking for the same prize?
DOCTOR: Clearly, you don't need money. So why do you rob?
(Ashildr adds her night's spoils to the collection in the chest and closes it.)
ASHILDR: For the adventure, Doctor. Isn't that what life's all about?

[Library]

(Lit by some candles and a big fire in the fireplace. Floor to ceiling bookcases are filled with identically bound volumes.)
ASHILDR: I've had eight hundred years of adventure, enough to fill a library if you write it down.
(The Doctor picks up a crown from a table.)
DOCTOR: A medieval queen? How exciting.
ASHILDR: You'd think. It was paperwork and backgammon mainly, as I recall. Ended up faking my own death. Did a bunk before the evisceration.
(Memories of her getting out of her coffin and climbing out of a window.)
ASHILDR: Now this was much more my thing.
(She hands him a longbow, and remembers stealing the clothes of a soldier so she could join the line of troops heading to battle.)
ASHILDR: The Battle of Agincourt. My first stint as a man. No-one will ever know that a mere woman helped end the Hundred Years' War.
DOCTOR: You're immortal, not indestructible. You can be hurt, killed even.
(He twangs the bowstring.)
ASHILDR: Ten thousand hours is all it takes to master any skill. Over over a hundred thousand hours and you're the best there's ever been. I don't need to be indestructible, I'm superb. You should have seen me. I could shoot six arrows a minute. I got so close to the enemy, I penetrated armour.
DOCTOR: How many people have you killed?
ASHILDR: You'll have to check my diaries.
DOCTOR: You can't remember?
ASHILDR: For what it's worth, I've saved many lives too.
(Memories of a crowd with pitchforks chanting 'kill the witch.' Ashildr was dragged along with her hands tied, fastened to a ducking stool and dumped into a lake. She somehow swims unnoticed to a bank behind the villagers and gets away unseen.)
ASHILDR: I cured an entire village of scarlet fever once, almost got drowned as a witch for my troubles. Fortunately, I'm really good at holding my breath. Ungrateful peasants.
(The Doctor picks up the beaked leather hood of a seventeenth century plague doctor.)
DOCTOR: The Black Death, 1348. I meant to warn you.
ASHILDR: I got sick, but I got better.
DOCTOR: Of course, your immune system is learning too. There's another bout coming. And a big fire that tears through London.
ASHILDR: Excellent. Maybe I start it.
DOCTOR: No, that was the Terileptils. Surgeon, scientist, inventor, composer, it's a fantastic CV.
ASHILDR: You should try my journals. I read them myself now and then. Drink pomace wine, have a little me time.
DOCTOR: You don't seem the nostalgic type.
ASHILDR: It's not nostalgia, it's curiosity. I can't remember most of it. That's the trouble with an infinite life and a normal sized memory.
DOCTOR: It can't have been easy, outliving the people you love.
ASHILDR: According to my journals, hell.
DOCTOR: Sorry.
ASHILDR: You'll have to remind me, what's sorrow like? It all just runs out, Doctor. I'm just what's left. In fact, I've done all I can here. I look up to the sky and wonder what it's like out there. Please, take me with you. All these people here, they're like smoke, they blow away in a moment. You don't know what it's like.
DOCTOR: I do know what it's like.
ASHILDR: Then, however you fly, whatever ship you sail in, take me with you.
DOCTOR: How'd you know I had a ship?
ASHILDR: Because I'm incredibly clever. It doesn't matter. Take me with you.
DOCTOR: We'll talk about it.
ASHILDR: This thing you're looking for, I'll help you find it. It'll be quicker.
DOCTOR: I don't need your help.
ASHILDR: Yes, you do. I know where Lucie Fanshawe lives, and I'm an excellent house-breaker. We'll leave in an hour.
(She goes out of the library and shuts the door to lean on it. The Doctor selects a journal from the start of the massive collection and starts reading. The first is in English with a strong right hand slant to the script.)
ASHILDR [OC]: Today is the day I should have died. Instead, I was re-born, by my hero, a man called The Doctor. My love is dying. It broke my heart when the questions started and I knew I had to leave him. I returned to find an old man who smiles and thinks I am a dream. I am flesh and blood, my love, but all you see is a ghost.
(Ashildr goes outside with a lantern. The Doctor discovers that some pages have been torn out of a journal written in Latin, and the ink is smeared with round drops of water.)
DOCTOR: Tears.
ASHILDR [OC]: The Plague. Mass graves. Sightless children
(Images of wooden framed houses and ragged people, and a weeping woman clutching a rag doll in her grief.)
DOCTOR: (reads) Clutching toys as they sleep, never to wake up. My children. My screams. I could not save you, little ones. Such pain. And yet, still, still I am not brave enough to die, to let go of this wretched life. I will endure, but no more babies. I cannot, will not, suffer such heartbreak again. From now on, it's me against the world.

[Grounds]

(Ashildr speaks to the something that is watching. The two bright lights hiding in the bushes.)
ASHILDR: Quiet, my friend. We have a visitor. I didn't get it, but I will. If your promise stands, I'll have it by dawn. My visitor can help me. Don't worry, he doesn't know about you, only about the artefact. He has no idea what we intend to do with it.
(The thing growls softly.)

[Dining room]

(Ashildr returns and puts out her lantern. The Doctor enters.)
DOCTOR: I read your journals. Why are there pages missing?
ASHILDR: When things get really bad, I tear the memories out.
DOCTOR: What could be worse than losing your children?
ASHILDR: I keep that entry to remind me not to have any more.
(She pokes a fire burning in a grate.)
DOCTOR: I've left you alone too long. I had no idea how much you'd suffered. But I remember the person you used to be. She's still in there. I can help you find her.
ASHILDR: Spare me your pity, I'm fine.
DOCTOR: I think this is just another mask that you wear to protect you from the pain.
ASHILDR: I think the alternative frightens you, that this is who I've become.
DOCTOR: This is no way to live your life, de-sensitised to the world.
ASHILDR: So you intend to fix me? Make me feel again, then run away? I don't need your help, Doctor, you need mine. Just this once, you can't run off like you usually do.
DOCTOR: How do you know? How do you know what I usually do? We've met once in a Viking village. I didn't give you my life story.
ASHILDR: It's true though, isn't it? You're the man who runs away.
DOCTOR: Oh, who told you that?
ASHILDR: Maybe I just worked it out.
(She puts her pistols into her belt.)
ASHILDR: Come on.
(They go out by the small door again, and the Doctor stops as if he hears the faint growling. We are shown more of a feline personage.)

[Outside the Fanshawes' home]

(A stately pile played by Tredegar House. Ashildr has donned her mask again, and they approach the rear of the property.)
ASHILDR: Housebreaks can be tricky.
DOCTOR: Not for me. Sonic technology. It should be able to deactivate any alarms.
ASHILDR: What's an alarm?
(She holds up a wanted flyer for The Knightmare.)
ASHIDR: The most wanted in the land.
DOCTOR: Now is not the time to be showing off.
ASHILDR: Now seems like a very good time to me.
(She slides the paper under the door and uses a wire to push the key out of the lock and onto it, so she can slide the paper back outside and unlock the door with it. Then she holds out a domino mask to the Doctor.)
ASHIDR: You'll need a mask, sidekick. Watch and learn.
DOCTOR: Brought my own, thanks.
(He puts on the sonic sunglasses.)

[Fanshawe's home]

ASHILDR: 'Tis black as night. I have a tinderbox somewhere.
(The Doctor sonics a candle into lighting.)
ASHILDR: Show off. Know where you're going, do you?
(She takes the candle from him.)
ASHILDR: The servant's stairs. Follow me.

[Staircase]

(Going upstairs, whispering.)
DOCTOR: Why are you still alone? What happened to the second immortality charge I gave you?
ASHILDR: Shh.
(She shows it him, hidden inside her jacket.)
ASHILDR: No one's good enough.
DOCTOR: Humans need
ASHILDR: Hush!
(They wait for a light at the top of the stairs to disappear.)
DOCTOR: Humans need shared experiences.
ASHILDR: I'm regretting sharing this one.
DOCTOR: It isn't right for you to be on your own!
(A maidservant comes out of a room along the corridor.)

[Upstairs corridor]

SERVANT: Goodnight, Ma'am.
(She walks away without seeing them.)
ASHILDR: I'll wager there's a dressing room. Come on!
(Ashildr opens a door further on and goes inside. The Doctor almost walks into the open door.)

[Dressing room]

(Ashildr crosses the dark panelled room and opens a large cabinet containing lots of inlaid drawers and compartments. The Doctor sets his curioscanner going.)
ASHILDR: Doctor! Doctor, turn that thing off.
(It leads him to one particular compartment containing a box, which in turn contains a large glowing purple gem in a diamond and pearl encrusted setting.)
DOCTOR: The Eyes of Hades.

[Fanshawe's room]

(On their way back through the house, a door opens. They hurry across an open area, probably the top of the main stairs, to another room to hide and discover that a man is also in there, snoring on a couch.)
DOCTOR: (sotto) Let's just go round and see if we can't get out the back.
ASHILDR: (sotto) Okay.
(Of course a floorboard creaks.)
FANSHAWE: Lucie?
(They duck down and crawl on hands and knees as Fanshawe rises and picks up a candle.)
FANSHAWE: Lucie?
(Ashildr looks over the far end of the couch and ducks down again as Fanshawe turns.)
FANSHAWE: Lucie?
(He goes out of the room. Ashildr and the Doctor stand, then the Doctor knocks a fire iron onto the floor with a clatter.)
FANSHAWE [OC]: There is an intruder on the premises! Bring me my blunderbuss!
(Ashildr readies her pistol.)
DOCTOR: What are you doing?
ASHILDR: It's kill or be killed.
DOCTOR: No, we can't. We should hide.
(Fanshawe re-enters the empty room with his own pistol at the ready.)
FANSHAWE: Guard the doors! Alert the militia!
(The Doctor's feet are dangling inside the chimney.)

[Chimney]

ASHILDR: (sotto) Your feet, you oaf.
(He pulls them up and they start climbing.)
ASHILDR: Oh, I said you'd be a liability. Just let me shoot them and be done with it!
DOCTOR: You're the liability. I never have this trouble with Clara.
ASHILDR: Oh, is she still with you, is she?
(They pause.)
DOCTOR: Oh, you remember Clara, do you?
ASHILDR: Of course. I take particular note of anyone's weaknesses.
FANSHAWE [OC]: Search every nook and cranny! I warrant they will hang for this!
ASHILDR: So what's wrong with Clara, then?
DOCTOR: There's nothing wrong with her.
ASHILDR: Why haven't you made her immortal?
DOCTOR: Well, look how you turned out.
ASHILDR: She'll die on you, you know. She'll blow away like smoke.
DOCTOR: Save your breath.
ASHILDR: How old are you, Doctor?
DOCTOR: Older than you.
ASHILDR: And how many have you lost? How many Claras?
(They climb onto the roof and escape.)

[Woodland]

(Walking along a broad path. At last, a bit of daylight to see by.)
DOCTOR: Robbery, burglary, that's capital. Meat and drink to the hangman, Ashildr.
(They pass a gibbet.)
ASHILDR: I'm not Ashildr. I'm Me. And I fear no hangman in Christendom.
(A crow caws, and a man jumps down from a tree to stand in front of them.)
SAM: Ah ha!
ASHILDR: Sam Swift the Quick. I wouldn't be so bold if I were you. Don't you know who I am?
SAM: The Knightmare, which is why I'm not alone.
(He has two accomplices.)
ASHILDR: 'Tis hardly a fair fight.
SAM: And it was fair when you stole my patch?
ASHILDR: Is that a fake nose, Sam? They should call you Sam Sniffed.
SAM: What's wrong with it? It's perfectly normal, innit?
ASHILDR: For an anteater maybe.
SAM: Ooo! Well, never knew you were so puny, Knightmare. Or should I say, Slightmare.
(They laugh.)
DOCTOR: No, not the puns. Line in the sand. No puns.
ASHILDR: It's what's in my brain that counts, Bingo Boy.
SAM: Well, no brain outwits a bullet, Dandyprat.
(He draws his pistol.)
DOCTOR: This is banter. I'm against banter. I'm on record on the subject of banter.
SAM: Lay down your arms, hand over the loot, or I'll shoot.
ASHILDR: (sighs) We better had. He'll probably aim to miss and hit one of us.
DOCTOR: We could give you cash instead.
SAM: Who's this, your sidekick? You've got your dad as a sidekick?
DOCTOR: I'm not his dad, I'm the Doctor.
SAM: Is that the best name you could come up with?
DOCTOR: What, says Sam Swift the Quick? That's trying a bit too hard, isn't it? Or are you a little bit slow?
SAM: You what?
(Ashildr takes Sam's pistol in one quick move.)
SAM: Oi!
DOCTOR: I rest my case. No-one outwits the Knightmare.
(Sam tries to take his pistol back. He and Ashidr struggle on the ground for it as Sam's two accomplices put their pistols to the Doctor's head.)
SAM: If you value the life of your sidekick, back off! Put the weapon down!
(Sam gets his pistol back and throws off Ashildr, then stands and points his weapon at the Doctor.)
SAM: Who's slow now, Doctor?
(Ashildr kicks his feet out from under him and gets the pistol back. Sam ends up on his back with his pistol pointing at his head.)
DOCTOR: Good question.
(Sam's accomplices back away from the Doctor.)
SAM: Please, Knightmare, I don't want to die. Let's have honour amongst us.
DOCTOR: Also can you confirm that I'm not your dad?
ASHILDR: What do you say, Dad? I should kill him? He'll be dead in a minute. What difference does it make?
DOCTOR: Kill him and you make an enemy of me.
(Ashildr stops pointing the pistol at Sam's head.)
ASHILDR: Run.
(Sam gets up, grabs his hat and runs away with the other two. Ashildr collects her own pistol from the ground.)
DOCTOR: I know their lives are short, I understand, but those lives do matter.
ASHILDR: Shut up. You're not my dad.

[Entrance hall]

(Back at Ashildr's manor house, the Doctor calls up the stairs.)
DOCTOR: I have a theory about the amulet.
(An old man clears his throat and comes in from the servant's area.)
CLAYTON: Morning, sir. Forgive me, but might I enquire into who you are?
DOCTOR: The Doctor.
CLAYTON: Clayton, sir.
(Ashildr comes down the stairs in a fuchsia coloured dress with white lace trim.)
CLAYTON: Would you care for a cocktail, milady?
ASHILDR: Oh, yes, please.
(Clayton leaves, coughing.)
ASHILDR: Half blind and deaf as a post. He is no use any more really, but
DOCTOR: You keep him on. See, you do have a heart. You don't fool me.
ASHILDR: How do I look?
DOCTOR: Pink. Are you coming down with something? Look, why would an alien artefact resemble the Eyes of Hades, King of the Underworld?
(Ashildr takes the jewel from the Doctor and goes into the dining room, putting it into her drawstring purse.)

[Dining room]

DOCTOR: An ancient Greek talisman which wards off evil and protects those in death on their journey to an afterlife?
ASHILDR: You tell me.
DOCTOR: Could it be that the mythology originated on another planet?
ASHILDR: You can't wait to get going and find out, I'll wager.
DOCTOR: No. I think I want to stick around, and keep an eye on you for a while.
ASHILDR: Get me back on track?
DOCTOR: Well, why not? Hey, we're a good team.
ASHILDR: Then take me with you.
DOCTOR: You don't want to get stuck with an old fool like me. You have this whole wonderful planet to play on.
ASHILDR: It takes a day to get to Kent.
DOCTOR: In the future, you'll fly.
ASHILDR: I want to fly right now. I have waited longer than I should ever have lived. I have lost more than I can even remember. Please, Doctor, just get me out of this. I want more than this. I deserve more than this. Why not? Why not?
DOCTOR: Because it wouldn't be good. Ashildr, please. Ashildr.
ASHILDR: I am not Ashildr any more.
(Something big snarls nearby.)
DOCTOR: Do you have a cat? It sounds like a very big cat. Hence the very big cat flap.
(Light is coming from behind a pair of doors. The Doctor opens them to reveal a man-sized biped with lights for eyes. It walks forward and the Doctor backs away. The being looks like a lion and is wearing a golden diadem. The lights in its eyes fade.)
ASHILDR: Leandro, meet the Doctor. You thought I was helping you. In fact, it was the other way round. Leandro, we have it. My friend here was as useful as I'd hoped.
DOCTOR: If somebody needed my help, why did nobody just ask? I am forced to assume you have plans I wouldn't approve of. Oh, Ashildr.
ASHILDR: Stop calling me that.
DOCTOR: Kill me!
LEANDRO: Why?
DOCTOR: If you intend any harm to this planet or its people, then killing me is by far your best move.
LEANDRO: You invite your own death?
ASHILDR: No. I just want you to attack first. Then my conscience is clear.
LEANDRO: Of what?
ASHILDR: You.
LEANDRO: (laughs) You are not of this world, or part of my plans. I have no quarrel with you.
DOCTOR: Then tell me why you are here and what you intend to do. Otherwise, get on with trying to kill me. But I advise you. Be very quick and very sure.
LEANDRO: I am from Delta Leonis. My tribe was overthrown, my world destroyed, my wife killed as we escaped.
DOCTOR: Using the amulet? That was your means of travel.
LEANDRO: I lost it when I crashed to Earth.
ASHILDR: I found him in my grounds. He's been sleeping there while I searched for it.
DOCTOR: The Underworld, gateway to an afterlife, another reality.
ASHILDR: We need it to open a portal, travel the galaxy.
DOCTOR: Oh! Oh, so what's the plan, Ashildr? Fancy yourself as his new Queen? Hunting, running errands while he sleeps.
ASHILDR: Oh, dear God. You're just like every other man. I'm not looking for a husband, you oaf. I'm looking for a horse to get me out of town. You said no.
DOCTOR: Oh, what? And you think you can trust him?
ASHILDR: He knows what it is to be alone.
DOCTOR: So do I.
ASHILDR: Then how could you do what you did?
DOCTOR: I'm looking for the headline here.
ASHILDR: The what?
DOCTOR: Well, you know, you want to escape? Well, go on. Escape as much as you like. Why would I not approve?
ASHILDR: The amulet.
DOCTOR: What about it?
LEANDRO: A death is required. It is only way the amulet works.
DOCTOR: Of course. Every single death is a tiny fracture in reality, and the amulet can lever the fracture open. Primitive, but effective.
ASHILDR: It's just exploiting an abundant resource. There's so much dying here.
DOCTOR: So who dies so you can run away?
ASHILDR: Clayton?
CLAYTON [OC]: Coming, milady.
DOCTOR: No, you can't. He loves you.
ASHILDR: To the end, it would seem.
LEANDRO: Would you rather take his place?
(Leandro breathes fire.)
ASHILDR: Not the Doctor. We agreed!
DOCTOR: Oh, Ashildr, daughter of Einarr, what happened to you?
ASHILDR: You did, Doctor. You happened.

[Closet]

(Later, the Doctor's hands are tied behind his back and he is secured to a chair in an adjoining storage room.)
DOCTOR: I know you've suffered. Your children dying.
ASHILDR: They would have died anyway. Human life is fleeting. People are mayflies, breeding and dying, repeating the same mistakes. It's boring. And I'm stuck here, abandoned by the one man who should know what eternity feels like. Who should understand.
DOCTOR: I do, now, but
ASHILDR: You still won't take me with you. You gad about while I trudge through the centuries, day by day, hour by hour. Do you ever think or care what happens after you've flown away? I live in the world you leave behind, because you abandoned me to it.
DOCTOR: Why should I be responsible for you?
ASHILDR: You made me immortal.
DOCTOR: I saved your life. I didn't know that your heart would rust because I kept it beating. I didn't think your conscience would need renewing, that the well of human kindness would run dry. I just wanted to save a terrified young woman's life.
ASHILDR: You didn't save my life, Doctor. You trapped me inside it. And now I've found someone who can set me free. Someone who understands.
DOCTOR: Look, I don't know what Lenny the Lion is up to, but I know his type. Very first argument, guaranteed he'll bite your head off.
ASHILDR: Or I'll bite his off. Perhaps I'll enjoy that.
DOCTOR: You're playing with fire. Open that portal and you have no idea what horrors might come through.
ASHILDR: That's as good a reason as any to do it.
DOCTOR: You're not like this. I know you're not.
ASHILDR: This is exactly what I'm like. This is what you made of me.
DOCTOR: He'll kill you.
ASHILDR: He'll have to be fast. And if he does, perhaps it's about time.
(Knocking on door.)
LLEWELYN [OC]: Lady Me?
(The Doctor scrapes his chair to the doorway of the closet.)

[Dining room]

(Two pikemen rush in, one Welsh and one English.)
LLEWELYN: Oh, Lady Me, thank goodness you are safe. Sam Swift has been captured and he swore the Knightmare was heading in this direction.
ASHILDR: I've not seen him.
STOUT: Sam Swift will hang in Tyburn at noon.
ASHILDR: In half an hour?
(She looks over her shoulder at the Doctor leaning out of the closet.)
ASHILDR: A guilty man destined to die? No harm in that. I have not seen the Knightmare. But this is his sidekick, the Doctor. He was robbing me. I only just managed to overpower him.
(Llewelyn checks a scroll, which turns out to be a flyer proclaiming Wanted! The Man known as "The Doctor".)
LLEWELYN: You will hang for this!
DOCTOR: No, listen, I was trying to help her. She tied
LLEWELYN: Silence or we'll
(Stout fires his pistol into the ceiling.)
LLEWELYN: Shoot.
ASHILDR: He needn't hang. But keep him under lock and key, for all our sakes.
(Clayton enters. Llewelyn draws his pistol.)
CLAYTON: Was that the door? Oh, dear. Always the quiet ones.
ASHILDR: Goodbye, Clayton. (to the Doctor) You see? I do have a heart.
DOCTOR: In which case, don't do it.
(Ashildr leaves the room and goes to her coach.)
DOCTOR: Do I look like some feckless thief? I'm on your side. I'm an undercover constable from Scotland Yard. Do you have Scotland Yard yet?
LLEWELYN: Been on the cider, have we?
(Stout unties the Doctor and pulls him to his feet.)
DOCTOR: The Dunbar Victory medal. I was decorated for valour in battle.
(Llewelyn squints at the Doctor's psychic paper. He either cannot read or isn't impressed by a Scotsman being on the side of Cromwell in 1650.)
STOUT: Tell it to the Newgate gaoler.
DOCTOR: All I want is to bring the Knightmare to justice.
LLEWELYN: But you were robbing Lady Me.
DOCTOR: I came to warn her. I fear her life is in danger.
(He looks out of the windows to see Ashildr cloaked and driving her coach, with Leandro inside it.)
DOCTOR: Look! It's the Knightmare, cloaked and in disguise, bound for Tyburn. You have to let me go, or take me there.
STOUT: You wish to hang too?
DOCTOR: Well, will you take me there if I say yes?
LLEWELYN: Indeed. There's a bounty on your head for twenty pounds.
DOCTOR: Twenty pounds? Is that all?
STOUT: 'Tis a small fortune to us.
DOCTOR: Well, in that case, I know where Lady Me keeps all of her money. Almost thirty pounds.
LLEWELYN: Now why didn't you say that in the first place?
(The Doctor is on horseback, galloping along the track and passing a marker that says 5 miles to Tyburn.)

[Tyburn]

(Looking nothing like the real scaffold in the middle of a crossroads outside London. A crowd have gathered for the noon entertainment. Posters on a fence say the Knightmare's reward is 100 compared to the Doctor's 20, amongst other items.Sam Swift is preparing himself by drinking from a bottle.)
WOMAN: Hang him! Hang him!
SAM: All right, calm down. Steady on. Such a good turn out. I'm honoured. Yeah I, er. (points at the hangman) Hey, he's new at this. Someone will have to show him the ropes.
(The crowd laughs.)
SAM: Don't worry mate, you'll get the hang of it. When I'm gone, they'll all say, that Sam Swift, he was well hung.
(More laughter.)
SAM: Well, I think a few of you know that already. Oh, yeah, I'm sure I recognise a few of you lovely ladies. You
(An elderly red-haired woman shakes her head and mouths no.)
SAM: And you. I mean I'd introduce you all, but I can't remember your names.
(Women boo.)
SAM: (to Hangman) Hey, it's a good job you're here, or they'd kill me.
(Nearby, a bell sounds the hour.)
CROWD: Hats off, hats off.
(The Doctor is still galloping through the woods. Ashildr has arrived, and got down from the driver's box.)
MAN: Stretch his neck!
SAM: Mary? Meg? Help me out here, miss.
BAXTER: That's Mrs Baxter to you!
SAM: That's a funny name for a fella!
(The crowd, and Mrs Baxter, laugh.)
LEANDRO: It's time.
SAM: Hold on, I've got plenty more. Jokes, that is, as well as women.
LEANDRO: Hang him now!
CROWD: Hang him! Hang him!
(The Doctor urges on his horse.)
MAN: Make us laugh, Sam!
(Sam takes another drink from his bottle as Ashildr makes her way through the crowd.)
SAM: Aye. For while you laugh, I live. It was raining on the way over here. But the hangman says to me, it's all right for you. I've got to walk back through this.
(He sees Ashildr give coins to the Hangman.)
SAM: What are you paying for, my beauty?
ASHILDR: To make it quick. A fitting end for you, Sam Swift.
SAM: Who should be the last to kiss these lips?
WOMEN: Me! Me! Me!
SAM: They must mean you, Lady Me.
(Ashildr kisses Sam.)
SAM: You remind me of someone. And now I want to live more than ever.
(The Doctor runs across a castle bridge. No castles at the real Tyburn, though.)
DOCTOR: Sorry, yes. Sorry about the horse! Excuse me!
LEANDRO: Time to hang.
DOCTOR: Sorry, excuse me. Excuse me! Sorry!
CROWD: Hang him! Hang him!
SAM: All right, all right. As God is my Highwayman. He steals the most precious gift of all. Life. Magical, filled with adventures. And at least I can say I lived mine to the full.
WOMAN: I love you, Sam Swift.
(Sam sees the Doctor looking at the posters.)
SAM: Is that the Doctor? Doctor, doctor! I'm a robber.
(The crowd are confused. The penny drops for the Doctor, though.)
DOCTOR: Have you taken anything for it?
(The crowd laughs as the Doctor makes his way to the scaffold.)
SAM: Er, Doctor, doctor.
DOCTOR: Quick man, I'm running out of patients!
SAM: Have you ever seen such a sidekick so old?
DOCTOR: I'm no one's sidekick.
SAM: He's so old, he farts dust!
DOCTOR: And his nose is so big that
SAM: They'll have to widen the noose!
DOCTOR: Or, or bury him in a pyramid.
SAM: You know what they say, big nose
CROWD: Oooooo!
DOCTOR: Big handkerchief!
(The crowd laughs as the Hangman manhandles Sam back to the noose.)
SAM: No! Doctor, don't leave me hanging.
(The Doctor gets out his psychic paper again.)
DOCTOR: Wait! I have a pardon here for Sam Swift from Cromwell himself.
(The Hangman takes the paper.)
HANGMAN: Sam Swift is pardoned!
(Sam falls to his knees. The crowd is not pleased. The Hangman gives the paper back to the Doctor.)
BAXTER: We didn't come all this way not to see someone hang. What about the Doctor? Yeah, hang the Doctor. Hang the Doctor! Hang the Doctor. Hang the Doctor!
ASHILDR: Ssh.
(The crowd quietens.)
ASHILDR: You want to see someone die? How's this?
(She holds up the Eye of Hades.)
DOCTOR: No! Ashildr, no! No!
(Ashildr slaps the Eye onto Sam's chest, where is sticks, and then sends out a purple ray into the sky. A rift opens in the clouds.)
DOCTOR: Purple, the colour of death. His life force is opening a portal.
ASHILDR: To my new life.
DOCTOR: Or to Hell.
(Leandro breaths fire at the crowd.)
BAXTER: A lion man!
(Then he points back at the rift.)
BAXTER: Look!
(A planet is visible beyond the rift.)
ASHILDR: Goodbye, Doctor.
LEANDRO: You are going nowhere.
DOCTOR: Doors work both ways. They let people out and they let the enemy in.
(Lots of small objects are visible around the planet.)
ASHILDR: What's that? What's happening? What are those things?
DOCTOR: Space ships, or they will be. They're coming through the rift, actualising in this plane of reality.
ASHILDR: You said you were the last of the Leonians. We were meant to escape.
LEANDRO: You shall. In death.
(The crowd screams as fireballs come flying through and explode on the ground. Leandro attacks the crowd, who scream and scatter. Militiamen fire their pistols at him.)
ASHILDR: No! Doctor, what have I done? What have I done to these people? Stop this! They are defenceless.
(Ashildr attacks Leandro.)
DOCTOR: Ashildr! He doesn't care.
ASHILDR: But I do. Oh, God, I do. I actually do. I, I care.
DOCTOR: It's awful, isn't it? It's infuriating. You think you don't care, then you fall off the wagon.
ASHILDR: Never mind about me. What are we going to do about them? We have to help them. They need you. They need us.
DOCTOR: Welcome back.
ASHILDR: Well? Do something then!
DOCTOR: Okay. Okay. Er. Eyes of Hades. Afterlife. Death opens up a gateway. We need to close it.
ASHILDR: Yeah, I know, but how?
DOCTOR: Sam Swift, he's the conduit. The amulet, it's still in him. It's his death that's opening the rift. So what do we do?
ASHILDR: Reverse it.
LEANDRO: You cannot reverse death.
ASHILDR: Oh, yes, we can.
(She holds up the other Mire repair chip. Leandro tries to snatch it.)
DOCTOR: Run!
(Up on the scaffold, Ashildr puts the chip onto Sam's forehead and it is absorbed into him.)
LEANDRO: No, my lady. They will destroy me for this.
(The ray changes from purple to gold. Leandro roars at Ashildr, who runs to hide behind the Doctor)
LEANDRO: The light of immortality. Spare me, my brothers!
(Leandro is disintegrated, and the rift closes. The crowd comes out of hiding and dusts themselves down.)
SAM: I'm alive. I'm alive!
(Sam laughs and the crowd cheers. The amulet stuck to his chest no longer shines.)

[Ye Swan with Two Necks]

(At a nearby alehouse.)
SAM: Last thing I remember is you turning up, Doctor. Good thing too. Between you and me, I was running out of material.
DOCTOR: Yeah, I could tell. Gave a whole new meaning to dying on stage.
SAM: Gallows humour can be tricky, but at least there's never a second house. We've nearly finished these. I'll get some more in. Oh, by the way, I've not forgotten that kiss.
(Sam walks away from the table.)
ASHILDR: Is he immortal now?
DOCTOR: Do you want him to be?
ASHILDR: I don't think I want anyone to be.
DOCTOR: Well, probably not. Probably the power would have been drained by the whole opening and reversing the portal thingy. There'll be enough power to bring him back, but not enough power to keep him here, probably.
ASHILDR: Did you just make all of that up?
DOCTOR: Yeah. But it's hard to keep track of all this stuff. Keep an eye on him though. He might be around for a while. Or not. Who can say?
ASHILDR: You're still not going to take me with you, are you.
DOCTOR: People like us, we go on too long. We forget what matters. The last thing we need is each other. We need the mayflies. See, the mayflies, they know more than we do. They know how beautiful and precious life is because it's fleeting. Look how Sam Swift made every last moment count, right to the gallows. Look how glad he is to be alive. I looked into your eyes and I saw my worst fears. Weariness. Emptiness.
ASHILDR: That's why you can't travel with me. Our perspectives are too vast. Too far away.
DOCTOR: You're not the first, you know. I did travel with another immortal once. Captain Jack Harkness.
ASHILDR: Who?
DOCTOR: He'll get round to you eventually. Who told you about me? The man who comes for the battle and runs away from the fallout.
ASHILDR: Take your pick. You've had an impact on this world. You've made waves.
DOCTOR: Sometimes tidal waves.
ASHILDR: I'm flattered.
DOCTOR: Well, you should be. You're an extraordinary woman, Ashildr. But I think I'm going to have to keep an eye on you.
ASHILDR: No.
DOCTOR: No?
ASHILDR: Someone has to look out for the people you abandon. Who better than me? I'll be the patron saint of the Doctor's leftovers. While you're busy protecting this world, I'll get busy protecting it from you.
DOCTOR: So are we enemies now?
ASHILDR: Of course not. Enemies are never a problem. It's your friends you have to watch out for. And, my friend, I'll be watching out for you.
DOCTOR: Ashildr, I think I'm very glad I saved you.
ASHILDR: Oh, I think everyone will be.

[Tardis]

(The Doctor is playing some sad guitar chords when the Tardis door opens.)
CLARA: Hey! Hello?
DOCTOR: Oh, hello! Hi.
CLARA: Did you miss me?
DOCTOR: Be more specific. Who are you?
CLARA: Ha, ha. I've got a present for you.
DOCTOR: Why? Am I ill?
CLARA: No.
DOCTOR: Are you ill?
CLARA: No.
DOCTOR: Are you never going to travel with me again, because I said a thing?
CLARA: It's not a good present.
DOCTOR: Oh, well that's a relief.
CLARA: Okay, Evie Hubbard? Year Seven, you helped her out with her homework? Imaginary interview with Winston Churchill. You basically cheated.
DOCTOR: That was her fault because she should have stressed imaginary.
CLARA: Anyway, she got an A and so she has sent you a selfie.
(Clara holds up her phone for him to see the photograph. He turns away.)
DOCTOR: Yes, you're right. That is not a good present.
CLARA: Come on.
DOCTOR: Do they make sherbet lemons any more? And I'd like a Ferrari. What about a Ferrari?
CLARA: Hmm. I knew you'd be thrilled.
DOCTOR: Okay, come on, let me see, let me see. Let me see, let me see.
(Clara hands over her phone with the photograph of herself, Evie and the certificate. He enlarges it, and in the background is Ashildr, keeping an eye on Clara.)
CLARA: What's wrong?
DOCTOR: Nothing. Nothing at all.
CLARA: Doctor?
DOCTOR: Tell her next time, I'll take cash.
CLARA: So, where are you going to take me?
DOCTOR: Wherever you want.
CLARA: Hmm. Somewhere, somewhere magical. Somewhere new.
DOCTOR: Ah, there is nowhere new under the sun. Above it, on the other hand.
(Clara hugs the Doctor as he sets the coordinates.)
DOCTOR: I've missed you, Clara Oswald.
CLARA: Well, don't worry, daft old man. I'm not going anywhere.
(The Doctor nods, Clara pulls the lever and the Tardis dematerialises.)


Once upon a time, there were Three Doctors.
(10th, 11th and War Doctor in the Tardis.)
Two Osgoods.

[National Gallery lift]

(Previously on The Day of the Doctor, in case you don't recognise it.)
(Osgood is cringing in the corner of the lift sucking on her asthma inhaler as a Zygon snarls at her before transforming into her double.)
OSGOOD: The Doctor will save me. The Doctor will save me.
OSGOOD-Z: Excuse me, I'm going to need my inhaler.

One peace treaty.

[Black Archive]

DOCTOR 10: Any second now, you're going to stop that countdown. Both of you. Together.
DOCTOR 11: And then you're going to negotiate the most perfect treaty of all time.
DOCTOR 10: Safeguards all round, completely fair on both sides.
DOCTOR 11: And the key to perfect negotiation?
DOCTOR 10: Not knowing what side you're on.
(The Doctors push back their chairs, stand up, and get out their sonic screwdrivers.)
DOCTOR 11: So, for the next few hours, until we decide to let you out
DOCTOR 10: No one in this room will be able to remember if they're human
DOCTOR 11: Or Zygon.
(Doctor 10 jumps onto the table, followed by 11.)
DOCTOR 10: Whoops-a-daisy!
(Memory filter in the ceiling explodes.)
BOTH KATES: Cancel the detonation!

[Office]

(We are watching a recording in progress. The Osgoods are sitting behind a desk with a eighteen inch square box on it, making a video. The one on the right has a 4th Doctor scarf looped around her neck. We'll call her Osgood 1. The one on the left is wearing the 7th Doctors query motif pullover. Designate her Osgood 2. One of the papers pinned to a notice board on the wall is a headline - White House Appoints Alien Ambassador.)
OSGOOD 2: Hello.
OSGOOD 1: Hello. Do you want to?
OSGOOD 2: No, you can, if you
BOTH: Shall we do it together? Operation Double. The Zygon peace treaty.
OSGOOD 2: I'm Osgood.
OSGOOD 1: I'm also Osgood.
OSGOOD 2: Remember that. It'll be important later.
OSGOOD 1: Operation Double is a covert operation, outside of normal UNIT strictures, to resettle and rehouse an alien race in secrecy on planet Earth.
OSGOOD 2:  With UNIT's help, twenty million Zygons have been allowed to take human form, been dispersed around the world, and are now living amongst us.
OSGOOD 1: We're making this in case something goes wrong. In case UNIT is infiltrated. In case something occurs to unmask the Zygons.
OSGOOD 2: Or in case one or both of us dies.
(We are shown a cemetery, with an Osgood standing in front a black marble headstone simply engraved My Sister, holding white flowers.)
OSGOOD 1: The Zygons are a peaceful race.
OSGOOD 2: Their shape-changing ability should not be considered a weapon.
OSGOOD 1: It's a survival mechanism.
OSGOOD 2: They embed themselves in other cultures, and live out their lives in their new bodies in peace and harmony. Mainly.
OSGOOD 1: Any race is capable of the best and the worst.
OSGOOD 2: Every race is peaceful and warlike.
OSGOOD 1: Good and evil.
OSGOOD 2: My race is no exception.
OSGOOD 1: And neither is mine.
OSGOOD 2: If one Zygon goes rogue
OSGOOD 1: Or one human
OSGOOD 2: Then the ceasefire will break.
(They put their hands on the box.)
OSGOOD 2: That's why the Doctor left us this.
OSGOOD 1: He called it the Osgood Box.
OSGOOD 2: If you've been paying attention, you'll be able to guess why.
OSGOOD 1: This is the last resort.
OSGOOD 2: The final sanction.
OSGOOD 1: Pray this box is never needed.
OSGOOD 2: Because if it is, that means the ceasefire is breaking
OSGOOD 1: And with twenty million shape-changing Zygons dispersed around the world
OSGOOD 2: That is the Nightmare Scenario.

(In Truth or Consequences, New Mexico, an adobe building is the Police Station. A woman runs for it as others unseen fire guns and shout a lot. It is Osgood, this time in a 6th Doctor question mark on the shirt collar costume, and brown Brigadier-style jumper. A bullet whizzes through the now open door and breaks a glass. She tries another door, but it is locked, so she hides under a desk and uses her inhaler before getting out her mobile phone. Before she can dial, something with red rubbery skin walks in. Her finger hovers email icon on her The Doctor T A R D I S Direct Link contact page, then she presses send. The Zygon grabs her and pulls her out from under the desk, then incapacitates her with a jolt of electricity to the forehead. Osgood drops her phone. The time is 10:21.)

[Tardis]

(While Osgood's message is coming up on the scanner, the Doctor is playing Amazing Grace on his electric guitar. He sees the words Nightmare Scenario flashing.)

[Brockwell Park, London]

(A crocodile of school children are being escorted by two women teachers. The Tardis is standing nearby and the Doctor is sitting on a swing in the designated play area, using his mobile phone.)
TEACHER: Come on, kids, no pushing!
CLARA [OC]: Hi, this is Clara Oswald. I'm probably on the Tube or in outer space. Leave a message! (beep)
DOCTOR: Hello, it's Doctor Disco. I'm in the twenty first century. I don't know what month. I'm staking out some of the most dangerous creatures imaginable.
(Two little girls stop and stare at him.)
DOCTOR: Operating under deep cover. Trying not to attract suspicion. Give me a call, Clara. Nightmare Scenario. I'm worried.
(He follows the little girls to the monkey bars.)
DOCTOR: Okay. Hey, Monster High and Cinderella. Down off the monkey bars. Listen to me. We've got to talk.

[UNIT Safe House, South London]

(A grand old building with a For Sale or To Let sign outside. Downstairs, Kate Lethbridge Stewart is giving orders.)
KATE: Get me Colonel Walsh. And I need you to coordinate the Operation Double locations.
JAC: There are twenty million Zygons. And most of the data was with
(Kate is holding a photograph of the two Osgoods.)
JAC: Her.
KATE: Do what you can. Start with any that have intelligence flags from the past six months.
(Beeps.)
JAC: Walsh coming through.
WALSH [OC]: Walsh. Turmezistan.
KATE: Any new arrivals?
(Walsh is a lady Red Beret.)
WALSH [on screen]: One. The pictures aren't very good.
(Kate puts on her glasses to see.)
KATE: Can you zoom in on the prisoner?
(Osgood is in manacles, being escorted by two Zygons.)
KATE: It's her. (to Jac) Get into her files. We have to assume they've been compromised.
(Jac's tablet screen fills with Truth Or Consequences over and over again.)
JAC: Er, too late. The encryption system's already been hacked. And they've sent through another video.

[Brockwell Park]

(The Doctor is on the monkey bars with the serious two little girls..)
DOCTOR: Look, I admire you, okay? I think you're ingenious. Pretending to be a couple of seven year  olds is a splendid way to conceal your blobbiness. But let's not pretend. You're very blobby. In fact, you two are the big blobs. And you are not patrolling the ceasefire.
(The girls climb down, the Doctor goes down the slide.)
DOCTOR: Fine. Fine, bury your heads. Listen to me. Listen! There are other factions. I know that there are other blobby factions that you don't control. They're planning something. And if we don't get together and stop it, it'll be the end of this. Of all of you.
JEMIMA: This is our jurisdiction, Doctor. These are our creatures. We are close to finding them.
CLAUDETTE: They are our children, and we will deal with them.
DOCTOR: Your kids are out of control. I'm taking this out of your hands.
(His phone rings.)
DOCTOR: Don't even think about going anywhere.
(He walks away to answer it.)
DOCTOR: Are you phoning me with your backside again, or are you really sending me a distress signal?
KATE [OC]: I'm really sending you a distress signal.

[UNIT Safe House]

KATE: They've kidnapped Osgood and they've stolen the location of every Zygon on Earth. Doctor, the ceasefire's broken down.

[Brockwell Park]

(Red gas is hissing from an alien canister.)
DOCTOR: Hey! Away! Away! Get those kids out of the way! Out of the way! Out of the way! Out of the way! Move! Out of the way!
(The school children and their teachers flee. Zygons step through the gas to grab Jemima and Claudette, who screams, and carry them away to a nearby Parks Maintenance van, registration LR55 YOY. It leaves with a squeal of tyres so the Doctor runs back to the Tardis, past a black three finger symbol on the notice board.)

[UNIT Safe House]

(That same symbol, this time in white on a black background along with alien lettering, is on the flag behind Osgood as she reads a prepared statement. She is flanked by Zygons.)
OSGOOD [on screen]: UNIT troops will be destroyed wherever they are in the world. The enemies of our race will be destroyed wherever they are in the world. The war is about to begin. There will be truth or there will be consequences.
(Message ends. The Doctor uses his phone.)
CLARA [OC]: Hi, this is Clara Oswald. I'm probably on the Tube or in outer space. Leave a message! (beep)
DOCTOR: Call me now.

[Block of flats]

(Clara removes her helmet and gloves, and goes inside. Her phone bingles. The Doctor 127 Missed Calls. She listens to one of the messages.)
DOCTOR [OC]: Hello, it's Doctor Disco.
(Then she encounters a sad boy sitting on the stairs.)
SANDEEP: Hello.
CLARA: Oh, hello. Sandeep, hello. You okay?
SANDEEP: I can't find my mummy and daddy.
CLARA: Well, why don't you wait here, and I can go see if I can find them?

[Sandeep's flat]

(Clara walks into the flat at the end of the corridor. It is dark.)
CLARA: Hello? Hello?
(Suddenly Sandeep's father is standing behind her. She gasps.)
CLARA: Oh! Sorry. Er, your little boy is out there. He couldn't find you.
(The man walks out.)
SANDEEP'S DAD [OC]: Daddy's here!
(Then the mother walks in.)
SANDEEP'S MUM: We can take him.
(Sandeep is screaming as his father carries him in over his shoulder.)
CLARA: Is, is he okay?
SANDEEP'S MUM: Everything's fine.

[Block of flats]

(Clara leaves number 52, tying back her hair. The door slams behind her. She gets out her phone and calls the Doctor.)
CLARA: Did you just call yourself Doctor Disco?

[Drakeman Junior School, Dulwich]

(A UNIT vehicle arrives, and the Doctor and Clara get out.)
KATE: This is where the Zygon High Command had their secret base.
CLARA: A junior school?
(They go inside. Photographs of Jemima and Claudette are on a wall collage.)
KATE: Terms of the settlement, Operation Double, were these. Twenty million Zygons, the entire hatchery, were allowed to be born and to stay on Earth. They were permitted to permanently take up the form of the nearest available human beings.
JAC: In this case, a large percentage of the population of the UK.

[Boiler room]

KATE: You left us with an impossible situation, Doctor.
DOCTOR: Yes, I know. It's called peace. What about the two little girl commanders? Weren't they helping you?
KATE: They've been almost impossible to deal with since Osgood left. Secretive, uncommunicative. We've known there's something going on. Some radicalisation, some revolution in the younger brood. They said they had it under control.

[Command centre]

(They go through a hole in the brick wall to an area festooned with red cords or cables. A giant sized polyp stands proud.)
DOCTOR: The Zygon command centre. That's the control polyp for all Zygons on Earth.
JAC: It's horrible.
DOCTOR: Could you? Would you mind? Thank you.
(Clara takes his torch. He splashes liquid from the pool in the centre of the polyp onto its fronds, then caresses some horns.)
DOCTOR: If this has been compromised, the Zygons are wide open. They'll be starting to panic. Starting to worry.
CLARA: Doctor, do you want to be alone with that thing?
DOCTOR: It's a command computer. You operate it by titivating the fronds.
CLARA: Are you enjoying that?
DOCTOR: I snogged a Zygon once. Old habits.
(Screens come to life, booting up with Sapphire.)
DOCTOR: Still got the old magic.
CLARA: So, Osgood's been kidnapped, right? I thought Osgood was dead.
KATE: There've always been two of her, ever since the ceasefire. We never knew which one was real.
DOCTOR: Both of them.
KATE: Okay, which one was Zygon.
DOCTOR: Both of them. They would have maintained a live link. They were both Zygon and human at the same time. They not only administered the peace, they were the peace.
JAC: When the other Osgood died, the survivor went pretty much mad with grief. Then she just disappeared. Went undercover in the States. Now, of course, the rebels have her.
DOCTOR: Ah ha! Okay. Zygons hatched and dispersed all over, but something's gone wrong. Mexico border, North Asia, West Africa, Australia. Panic. Paranoia. What would happen if they knew who we were?
(Beep.)
JAC: We've received another video.
(They gather round Jac's tablet.)
KATE: That's the Zygon High Command. It's Jemima and Claudette.
ZYGON [OC]: We have been betrayed. We were sold. Our rights were violated. We demand the right to be ourselves. Normalise. Normalise!
(Jemima and Claudette transform into Zygons, then are zapped to dust by electricity from two other Zygon hands.)
ZYGON [on screen]: We are now the Zygon High Command. All traitors will die. Truth or consequences.
(Message ends.)
DOCTOR: So, we have a Zygon revolution on our hands. We need to open negotiations.
KATE: I'm not negotiating with them. As far as they're concerned, everyone's a traitor.
CLARA: If you're not going to negotiate, what are you going to do?
KATE: They're holed up in this settlement in Turmezistan. It's where they've taken Osgood. I'm going to order Colonel Walsh to bomb it.
DOCTOR: Isn't there a solution that doesn't involve bombing everyone?
KATE: The treaty's been comprehensively violated, Doctor.
DOCTOR: This is a splinter group. The rest of the Zygons, the vast majority, they want to live in peace. You start bombing them, you'll radicalise the lot. That's exactly what the splinter group wants.
JAC: Truth or consequences. What exactly does that mean?
KATE: It's just the usual kind of nonsense these idiots call themselves.
CLARA: It's in New Mexico.
KATE: What?
CLARA: It's a town in New Mexico. Truth or Consequences. Er, they renamed it after a TV show, for a bet or something. It's a Trivial Pursuit question. I used to memorise Trivial Pursuit questions so I could win.
KATE: That's the last place we received signal from Osgood's phone, isn't it? New Mexico.
DOCTOR: Okay. Kate Stewart, no bombs for you. Go to Truth Or Consequences. See what you can find out. The Doctor will go to Turmezistan. Negotiate peace, rescue Osgood, and prevent this war, cos that's what he does. Clara, Jac, you stay here. This is your country. Protect it from the scary monsters. And also from the Zygons.
CLARA: Fine.
DOCTOR: Oh, and do you still have the presidential aircraft?
CLARA: I thought you didn't like being President of the World.
DOCTOR: No, but I like poncing about in a big plane.

[Airport tarmac]

(Night. The Doctor poses on the steps then goes inside his aeroplane. Kate and Clara walk away.)
CLARA: How many troops do you have?
KATE: Not many. Usually on bigger cases we can draft in from the regular army. We can't do that now. The secrecy of the project has to be maintained.
CLARA: You got any snazzy weapons?
KATE: There was an attempted Zygon invasion before, in the seventies, eighties. One of our staff was a naval surgeon. Worked at Porton Down on the captured Zygons. Developed Zee-67. It's a nerve gas. Unravels their DNA. Basically turns them inside out.
CLARA: Where do you keep it?
KATE: We don't. It was taken. The formula, the lot.
CLARA: Who took it?
KATE: Somebody with a Tardis.
JAC: They're ready for you, ma'am.
KATE: (to Clara) Keep in touch.
(Kate is driven away.)
CLARA: Oh, I just need to swing by home and grab a couple of things.
JAC: Yeah, course.

[Block of flats]

(Clara closes the door to flat 64, which looks to be directly above flat 52. She and Jac are walking down the stairs when they hear -)
SANDEEP'S DAD: Quick, before someone sees us.
(Sandeep's parents are dragging a large bundle to the lift. Clara and Jac watch them put it inside, then hear Sandeep call out. The lift door closes and it goes down.)
CLARA: It's really slow. We can catch them. Come on!
(Jac and Clara stand outside the lift on the ground floor as it creaks and groans.)
CLARA: It's slower than usual.
JAC: What's wrong with it?
(The lift doors open. It is empty.)
JAC: Is there a cellar, or somewhere else they could have gone?
CLARA: No.

[Lift]

(They step inside and the doors close. Slime dribbles down the control panel.)
JAC: Ugh, what is that?
(The front of the control panel pops loose. Clara opens it to reveal Zygon style controls.)
JAC: No, don't.
(Clara touches the controls. The lights go out and the lift drops, shaking violently. Clara turns on the light on her phone. Then the lift stops and the doors open.

[Tunnel]

(They step out into a huge tunnel. Sandeep is calling out in the distance. Shadowy figures with torches are carrying things in the distance. Clara and Jac press themselves against the wall of the tunnel.)
CLARA: I think we need to get some reinforcements.
(They tiptoe back to the lift.)

[UNIT Command Base, Turmezistan]

(A spectacular snowcapped mountain dominates the skyline. Two Land Rovers are let through a check point. They drive past some soldiers fitting missiles to drone aircraft registration 1028.
Inside, an American woman is controlling an attack drone in flight.)
LISA: Approaching target at 1-00-65-12. Confirm strike order
WALSH: Order confirmed.
DOCTOR: At ease. I'm the President of the World. I'm here to rescue people and generally establish happiness all over the place. The Doctor. Doctor Funkenstein.
WALSH: Yes, we know who you are.
LISA: Going to strike altitude.
DOCTOR: What's going on here? Fun and games?
PILOT [OC]: We're seven hundred metres lower, seven hundred metres lower than planned. Over.
DOCTOR: You're not bombing that town. That's where they're holding my friend.
WALSH: They're dangerous. And your friend is almost certainly dead. I'm not going to allow them to disperse. You can't track a shape-shifter.
LISA: Visual on the target.
WALSH: Confirm strike.
DOCTOR: Colonel.
WALSH: Confirm strike.
(But Lisa is looking at the image on her screen, and seeing a man and boy waving at her.)
WALSH: Confirm strike.
(The same man and boy in the photograph on her console. The Doctor sees it too.)
WALSH: Confirm strike. Confirm strike!
LISA: Strike aborted. Strike aborted.
DOCTOR: Well, that's interesting.

[Sheriff's Office]

(The black Chevrolet Tahoe leaves Business 25 at exit 79, one mile from Truth or Consequences and heads into the sleepy town in New Mexico, USA. The Zygon rebel symbol is present here, on the painted Mexican-style buildings. There are no signs of life apart from some tumbleweed. Kate stops, gets out and walks over to a sign on a wall - No Dogs - to which the words No British have been added. She is watched as she checks her map then takes out her gun before walking to the same Police Station that Osgood ran into. The place is a mess.)
KATE: Hello? Hello?
(She puts her gun away and looks at the notice board by the desk that Osgood had hidden beneath. There is a photograph of Osgood at a gas station. A policewoman points her gun at Kate and cocks it.)
NORLANDER: You one of them?
KATE: I'm a friend. I've come to help.
NORLANDER: Alone? Have you come to help alone?
KATE: What happened here?
NORLANDER: You must have brought backup. Where's your backup? Tell me!
KATE: First, tell me why I need it.

[UNIT Command Base, Turmezistan]

(Loading up the Land Rovers.)
WALSH: We think it's a Zygon training camp. We never see more than one or two of them outside at any one time. But they always take different shapes, we don't know how many there really are. We don't know how they come and go. Whether they go through tunnels, or whether they turn into dogs and run out across the hills.
DOCTOR: So, that's what we'll find out.
WALSH: We should have that gas. We should be able to rip them inside out.
DOCTOR: Colonel, take it easy. They're trying to unsettle you. They're trying to make you paranoid and panicked.
WALSH: Any living thing in this world, including my family and friends, could turn into a Zygon and kill me, any second now. It's not paranoia when it's real.

[UNIT Safe House]

(The weapons are being handed out to the troops.)
JAC: I've been looking into this. There have been reports all over London of strange activity in lifts. I've patched into CCTV from Scotland Yard. All the elevators I can find. Now, this is SOAS. People dragging bundles. They go down, down, down, down, down, down. A few minutes go by, and then
(The screen flickers, goes black, then the lights come back on and the lift is empty.)
JAC: They're all gone. There is something very wrong happening underneath London.

[Sheriff's Office]

(Norlander downs a cup of water. Kate is perusing files. The digital clock on the wall says it is Thu 1, 11:01)
NORLANDER: The Brits came two years ago. We didn't want them. They just They just turned up. No jobs. Nowhere to live. No money. And they were, they were odd. They started getting into fights. Couple of them got killed.
KATE: More than a couple. What happened here?
NORLANDER: After the murders, they started banding together. And then, one day, one of them changed.
KATE: Changed?
NORLANDER: One of them was walking down West Main, and suddenly, it turned into a, a reptile.
(Kate finds a sketch of a Zygon.)
NORLANDER: They just came for us. They turned into monsters and they came for us. And, and we couldn't fight them. You can't tell who's who. They can turn your own family against you.
(Kate calls up a photo on her phone.)
KATE: Have you seen her?
NORLANDER: Yeah, she was here. She was at the motel, asking questions. Before.
(It is Osgood.)
NORLANDER: Everybody's gone.
KATE: Where?

WALSH [OC]: Okay, listen carefully. Once we get to the village we have a thirty minute window before the airstrike.

[Zygon Occupied Village, Turmezistan]

(A small village with a church rather than a mosque.)
WALSH: We all know what a rabbit warren this place is, but we've got intel they're holed up inside the church. Hitchley, you take the front, storm it, draw their fire. The Doctor and I will take the back.
(The Doctor holds out a photo of Osgood.)
DOCTOR: This is our object. We need to get her back, safely. Try to kill as few of them as possible. I need have to have someone to negotiate with.
WALSH: You know what they're capable of. Do not fall victim to it. Truck open. Code Green.
HITCHLEY: Let's move out!

[Outside the church]

(Walsh and the Doctor go through the graveyard to the back of the church. At the front, Hitchley fires three shots into the air.)
HITCHLEY: Come out! Throw down your weapons! Come out! We have you surrounded! Come out of there!
(No movement.)
HITCHLEY: Come out, we have you surrounded!
(The carved church door opens and an old woman comes out.)
HITCHLEY'S MUM: I don't have any weapons. Please.
HITCHLEY: Take aim. On my command.
HITCHLEY'S MUM: No. No, don't, please. Johnny, you don't understand.
HITCHLEY: You're not my mother. Don't use my name.
HITCHLEY'S MUM: They took us here. They came to the house and took us. They took your sister. Me.
(She starts to walk down the steps.)
HITCHLEY: Stay where you are.
HITCHLEY'S MUM: It's not us who are the impostors. Don't let them trick you. It's your commanders, your chief. They're the aliens.
WALSH [OC]: Do not fall victim.

[Behind the church]

WALSH: Ask for details. She's a copy. Ask something

[Outside the church]

WALSH [OC]: Only your mum could know.
HITCHLEY: Mom, I'm going to have to ask you some questions.
HITCHLEY'S MUM: Don't do this. You know it's me. Don't let them trick you.
HITCHLEY: Date and place of my birth.
HITCHLEY'S MUM: They brought us here. They're using us against you. I'm scared. Please, I'm so scared.
HITCHLEY: Name of my favourite teddy bear.
HITCHLEY'S MUM: I don't remember. I'm sorry, I don't.

[Behind the church]

HITCHLEY'S  MUM [OC]: Don't kill me because I can't remember!
WALSH: Hitchley!

[Outside the church]

(More people come out of the church. The soldiers start to lower their weapons as they recognise them.)
HITCHLEY: Stay back! All of you, stay back from them!

[Behind the church]

WALSH: That is not your mother. It is an alien hostile.

[Outside the church]

HITCHLEY'S MUM: We're not those creatures. We're hostages.

[Behind the church]

WALSH: Kill it!
HITCHLEY'S MUM [OC]: I can prove it.

[Outside the church]

(She is almost within reach of her son.)
HITCHLEY'S MUM: I can prove who we are. Just come inside, I'll show you.

[Behind the church]

WALSH: Don't go in there.

[Outside the church]

HITCHLEY'S MUM: Please.
HITCHLEY: You're not my mom.
HITCHLEY'S MUM: Oh, God, you're going to kill me.
HITCHLEY: Mom, please.
HITCHLEY'S MUM: You are. You're going to kill me. I love you. I forgive you and I love you.

[Behind the church]

WALSH: Do it!

[Outside the church]

(The soldiers all raise their weapons again. Hitchley's mum closes her eyes, then Hitchley lowers his gun. He is nearly crying.)
HITCHLEY: What proof?

[Behind the church]

WALSH: Don't go in there. You're going to your death!

[Outside the church]

WALSH [OC]: Hitchley, kill it.
HITCHLEY: Let's go. Over and out, ma'am.
(The soldiers follow their relatives into the church.)

[Behind the church]

WALSH: Damn it. Damn it!
DOCTOR: This is pointless! Just let me go in and talk!
(They run round the church. Walsh shoots the lock off a side door.)

[Church]

(Walsh and the Doctor enter a room with a strategy table laid out. There are sets of hairy bundles on the floor, still sizzling with electricity.)
WALSH: They've executed my men.
DOCTOR: Where are the Zygons?
WALSH: We need to bomb the hell out of this place. It's infested with these things. We can't tell who the enemy is any more, we can't count them and we can't track them!
DOCTOR: I'm not going to let you do that.
WALSH: I just lost my men, I'll quite happily bomb the hell out of anywhere. We need to move. Strike's on its way.
DOCTOR: I need to find Osgood.
WALSH: You've got ten minutes.
(Walsh leaves. The Doctor is looking at the coloured blocks on the table when -)
OSGOOD [OC]: Help! Help!
DOCTOR: Osgood! Osgood!
(He stamps on the floor, looking for a trap door.)
OSGOOD [OC]: Doctor!
DOCTOR: Osgood!
OSGOOD [OC]: Doctor, I'm here!
DOCTOR: Osgood!
OSGOOD [OC]: Doctor, I'm down here!
DOCTOR: Osgood!
OSGOOD [OC]: Doctor!
(He finds the trap door under a carpet in either a cupboard or a small corridor.)

[Basement]

OSGOOD: Doctor! Doctor!
(The Doctor jumps down the ladder. and turns on a torch.)
DOCTOR: Osgood!
(A jet flies overhead. He finds her sitting, manacled.)
DOCTOR: Got to get you out. They're going to bomb this place. What do the Zygons want?
OSGOOD: They're training, practising new skills. Doctor, what are you doing here?
(He sonicks her manacles.)
DOCTOR: Rescuing you. In quite a dashing way, I might add.
OSGOOD: They fled through the tunnels. They're going back to the UK. If you're here, they've got you out of the way. Who's left in the UK?
DOCTOR: Clara.
ZYGON: Clara!
DOCTOR: Oh, hello.
(Whee Boom! Rocks fall on top of the Zygon.)
DOCTOR: They've started. So much for ten minutes.
(Boom!)

[Truth or Consequences]

KATE: You found something? What? What do you want me to see?
(Norlander opens a dumpster full of hair and sizzling electricity.)
KATE: Oh, God. W-were those all people?
(Sizzling sounds are coming from more dumpsters nearby.)

[Tunnel]

(A lift arrives. Jac, Clara and some soldiers get out.)
JAC: It's an odd world nowadays, isn't it?
CLARA: It's always been an odd world.
JAC: Mmm. I mean, doesn't it feel, sometimes, that things are coming to an end? Everything's just going nuts.
CLARA: You're middle-aged, that's what it is. No offence. Everybody middle-aged always thinks the world's about to come to an end. Hmm. Never does. It's here. Oh, my God.
(Lots of Zygon tech.)

[Aeroplane]

The Zygon is wheeled in tied to a box trolley. The Doctor follows, on his phone.)
CLARA [OC]: Hi, this is Clara Oswald. I'm probably on the tube or in outer space. Leave a message!
DOCTOR: Can you change your voicemail message, please, it's getting very boring.
(Osgood is behind him and sits down.)
DOCTOR: Oh, I see you've accessorised it.
OSGOOD: Yes.
DOCTOR: The old question marks.
OSGOOD: You used to wear question marks.
DOCTOR: Oh, I know, yes, I did.
OSGOOD: They were nice. Why don't you wear them any more?
DOCTOR: Oh, I do. I've got question mark underpants.
OSGOOD: Makes one wonder what the question is.
(The Doctor pulls up another chair and sits down.)
DOCTOR: Which one are you? Human or Zygon?
OSGOOD: I don't answer that question.
DOCTOR: Why not?
OSGOOD: Because there isn't a question to answer. I don't accept it. My sister and I were the living embodiment of the peace we made. I will give all the lives that I have to protect it. You want to know who I am, Doctor? I am the peace. I am Human and Zygon.
DOCTOR: Like a hybrid.
OSGOOD: A hybrid, if you like.
DOCTOR: Well, I'm proud to know you, Osgood. And I promise that I won't tell anyone that you're a human. Zygons need to keep the human original alive to refresh the body print. If you were a Zygon, you'd've changed back within days of your sister's death.
OSGOOD: Those were the old rules, before Zygons could pluck loved ones from your memory and wear their faces. Zygons only need to keep the original alive if they need more information from them. If the interrogation is over, then the original can die.

[Tunnel]

(Faces illuminatied by red light.)
JAC: Oh, my God. These are Zygon pods.
(Lots of large scaley things attached to the roof and walls.)
CLARA: I think you might be right.
JAC: About what?
CLARA: The end of the world.

[Aeroplane]

(In the air. The Zygon roars.)
DOCTOR: Bit of first-things-first-ness. What's your name? My name's. Well, you can call me the Doctor. But then you knew that, didn't you? You want something. What is it?
ZYGON: You are the President of the World?
DOCTOR: I suppose so.
ZYGON: We want the world.
(The Zygons laughs.)

[Tunnel]

(Troops march in from the lift.)
CLARA: Okay. It looks like whole buildings full of people have been pinched. In fact, it looks like a whole London full of people have been pinched. But we've got here early, they're still growing. We've have to neutralise these before they hatch. Take your positions.
(Gun bolts slide.)
CLARA: Do you know what? I'm enjoying this.
JAC: Clara.
CLARA: What?
JAC: We don't know that's what these are.
CLARA: Oh, come on. These are eggs, or pods, or whatever. Look.
(She pulls the membrane from one pod 'window'.)
CLARA: Oh, my God, that's me.
JAC: I think we should wait.
CLARA: Look, they're here. They're growing duplicates of us. We have to destroy them. I've seen this happen before. It happened to that little boy. They took his parents and then they took him.
JAC: But I don't see how these are duplicates. That's not how Zygons work. They don't grow duplicates, they kidnap the originals. So these, these are the humans. Retreat. Retreat! This is a trap! This is an ambush!
(A large number of Zygons are there. Clara is calm and smiling slightly.)
JAC: No. Oh, no, Miss Oswald, please. Please!
CLARA: Kill the traitors.
(Lots of screaming while Clara recalls what happened in Sandeep's flat.)
CLARA [memory]: Is he okay?
(A Zygon stood behind Sandeep's Mum and zapped Clara, then her duplicate appeared.)
CLARA-Z [memory]: Hello, Clara. My name is Bonnie.
(The UNIT troops have been reduced to hairballs.)

[Aeroplane]

ZYGON: We want the truth of who we are to be acknowledged. We want to live as ourselves. At any cost. We want a home.
DOCTOR: Well, you can't have the United Kingdom. There's already people living there. They'll think you're going to pinch their benefits.
ZYGON: We're already there, Doctor. The invasion's already taken place, bit by bit, over the last year. We've won the first battle. And now, we are going to begin the war.

[Sheriff's Office]

(Kate is going through more files when Norlander comes in. It is night, 11.01 according to the clock. Insects are chirping.)
NORLANDER: There's hundreds more. They killed everybody.
KATE: We have to find out what forms they took, how many of them there were. How did this happen?
NORLANDER: Somebody once caught the briefest of glimpses of a Zygon in its proper form. A child who hadn't learned to preserve its body print, who had been left alone to learn these things for itself. And then word went round these primitives that we were monsters.
KATE: We?
NORLANDER: There isn't any backup, is there? I just had to be sure.
(Norlander transforms into a Zygon and reaches for Kate. In the UNIT safe house, Zygon-Clara is making a call.)
CLARA-Z [OC]: Commander calling Truth or Consequences. What is your status? Repeat, Commander calling Truth or Consequences. What is your status?
(Presumably the Kate who uses Zygon tech to reply is a Zygon, but we cannot be sure.)
KATE-Z: Commander, UNIT neutralised in North America. Truth or Consequences.

[UNIT Safe House]

CLARA-Z: Copy that.
(She goes to the armoury and unlocks it, and takes a case from a rack. Then she logs into the computer and uses her phone.)
CLARA-Z: Bonnie speaking. UNIT neutralised in the UK. More or less.
(The screen shows the position of the Doctor's plane returning to the UK. Clara-Z watches it from a cliff top and makes a call.)

[Aeroplane]

ZYGON: Answer it. Say goodbye. This plane will never land.
DOCTOR: Really. Clara?

[Cliff top]

CLARA-Z: Doctor.

[Aeroplane]
DOCTOR: Clara?

[Cliff top]

CLARA-Z: There you are.
(The case contains a missile launcher. She puts her phone on speaker and takes it out to target the aeroplane.)
DOCTOR [OC]: Clara, I'm glad you're okay. Listen.
CLARA-Z: You're breaking up.
DOCTOR [OC]: The invasion has happened. You're probably surrounded by Zygons. Get to the Tardis, get yourself safe.

[Aeroplane]

DOCTOR: And apparently my plane is never going to land, but let's see what we're going to do about that.

[Cliff top]

CLARA-Z: I'm sorry, but Clara's dead.

[Aeroplane]

CLARA-Z [OC]: Kate Stewart is dead. The UNIT troops are all dead.

[Cliff top]

CLARA-Z: Truth or consequences.
(She fires the missile and it appears to lock on to the plane.)

[Aeroplane]

DOCTOR: Clara!
(Offscreen explosion.)

To Be Continued...

Clara's flat]

(We see Clara in her Zygon pod. Next, she's waking up suddenly in her own bed. The alarm clock shows the time backwards at first, then correctly. 6:26. The camera is at a slight tilt to convey unreality as Clara gets up and walks along the corridor to the bathroom. She opens the cabinet and takes out a tube labelled This Is Toothpaste, then squeezes some onto her toothbrush, dropping it in the sink when she sees that it is black.
DOCTOR [OC]: Clara. Clara!
(Clara goes to the living room.)
CLARA-Z [OC]: You're breaking up!
(The television screen is crackling with static signal.)
DOCTOR [OC]: The invasion has happened. You're probably surrounded by Zygons. Get to the Tardis, get yourself safe. Apparently my plane is never going to land. Let's see what we can do about that!
CLARA-Z: I'm sorry, but Clara's dead.
(Clara runs to the front door and opens it, but there is only a blank wall behind it. In the pod, her eyes move rapidly beneath the lids. She goes to the window in the living room and opens the curtains. Blank.)
CLARA: Dream checks.
(The newspaper print is gibberish.)
CLARA: Dream checks, dream checks.
(Except for down at the bottom of the page.)
CLARA-Z [OC]: It's your decision, Doctor.
(She turns more pages to read -)
CLARA-Z [OC]: Truth or consequences.
(The television now shows Clara-Zygon's viewpoint, through the missile launcher to the Doctor's aeroplane. Clara leaps up and jolts the screen. Clara-Z's arm jerks and the missile misses the plane.)

[Aeroplane]

(Where Osgood is looking down out of a window.)
OSGOOD: Doctor?
(The plane rocks as the missile zooms past.)
DOCTOR: Missed!
(Clara-Z reloads and aims. Clara strains to move the TV again, but it won't budge. Instead, she shapes her hand as if it is on the trigger, and tries to stop her counterpart from squeezing. She bites it and Clara-Z fires the missile. The aeroplane goes Ka-BOOM! Clara-Z turns away, satisfied.)

[Etoine's flat]

(A frightened man carrying a couple of full plastic shopping bags runs up the slope from an underpass very like the one in Flatline, bumping into a street cleaner who is brushing sizzling bundles of hair along the ground. He drops his shopping and carries on running into the block of flats above the Fleet Estate Cenre, looking back occasionally at the impassive people standing and sitting around. Clara-Z comes up the slope and sees him run inside, then catches him up inside his bare and tatty living space.)
CLARA-Z: I know what you are.
ETOINE: Please. Please.
CLARA-Z: I'm going to set you free. Humans cannot accept the way we really are. If we cannot hide, we must fight. You are going to be the first. The first to make the humans see.
(She raises her arms and zaps his head. He falls then runs away. We hear squelching noises as his arm transforms into thick pink with suckers. He runs outside as more suckers pop out of his skin.)

[Fleet Estate]

(Clara-Z follows to watch the transformation as he stands in front of a group of unmoved teenagers, and films it on her phone.)
ETOINE: Help me. Help me. Help! Help me.
(Transformation complete, the terrified Zygon runs back into to the shopping centre. Clara-Z makes a call.)
CLARA-Z: Commander here. The first one has been changed. I'm going to UNIT to retrieve the Osgood box.
(In her mind, in her pod, Clara replays the moment the aeroplane exploded, then pauses the image on the TV.  Two parachutes are visible. She smiles.)

[Beach]

(Littered with bits of wreckage. Osgood sits up, still wearing the parachute harness. She feels around her for her spectacles and finds they have broken at the bridge.)
OSGOOD: Doctor? Doctor!
(She shrugs off her harness and goes over to where he is getting out of his, nearby, sonic sunglasses safely on his nose.)
DOCTOR: Any questions?
OSGOOD: Why do you have a Union Jack parachute?
DOCTOR: Er, camouflage. 
OSGOOD: Camouflage?
DOCTOR: Yes, we're in Britain. Oh, your specs are broken. I'll fix them. You can wear mine, they're sonic.
OSGOOD: Sonic specs?
DOCTOR: Yeah.
OSGOOD: Isn't that a bit pointless? Like a visual hearing aid?
DOCTOR: What's wrong with pointless? I once invented an invisible watch. Spot the design flaw.
OSGOOD: You're talking nonsense to distract me from being really scared. It's one of your known character traits.
(She puts the sonic sunglasses on.)
DOCTOR: Don't look at my browser history.
(The sunglasses beep.)
OSGOOD: Whoa!
DOCTOR: Yeah, I said don't.
(They reach the concrete jetty leading up off the beach and walk up it..)
OSGOOD: Why didn't that Zygon blow us up with her big bazooka?
DOCTOR: She did blow us up with her big bazooka. This is us being blown up with a big bazooka.
OSGOOD: But, I mean, she seems to know what she's doing. The first thing I'd do if I wanted to invade the world would be to kill you.
DOCTOR: Thanks.
OSGOOD: I wouldn't even let you get talking, like you always do. Bullet between the eyes, first thing.
DOCTOR: Again, thank you.
OSGOOD: Twelve times, if necessary.
DOCTOR: Ah, yes. Why limit yourself? You've really thought this through, haven't you?
OSGOOD: I'm a big fan. But she gave you a chance to get out. She hesitated. If she had Clara's memory print, she'd know better than to give you even a second. You've gone quiet because I mentioned Clara. You think she might be dead.
DOCTOR: Yes.
OSGOOD: Are you okay?
DOCTOR: I don't know. I'm still in the hope phase.
OSGOOD: How's that going?
DOCTOR: Hell. Please talk about something else.
(In her mind, in the pod, Clara is miming texting with her eyes closed. In the real world, Clara-Z is texting without realising it.
Osgood and the Doctor reach the access road.)
OSGOOD: Why do they want to destroy the ceasefire?
DOCTOR: Don't think of them as rational. They're different. They don't care about human beings, they don't care about their own people. They think the rest of Zygonkind are traitors.
(The Doctor's phone bingles. New text message.)
DOCTOR: It's a splinter group.
(The Doctor takes it out of his pocket and looks. The sender is Clara.)
OSGOOD: Clara. Well, not Clara. The Zygon who
DOCTOR: The Zygon who probably killed her. Read it.
(She takes the phone.)
OSGOOD: It says, I'm awake.
DOCTOR: What does that mean? A political awakening? Why would she be sending me propaganda? She just blew me up with a big bazooka.
OSGOOD: Never really met Clara. Pretty strong, yeah?
DOCTOR: She was amazing.
OSGOOD: No. Not was. Is. It's not from the Zygon. It's from Clara.
DOCTOR: How?
OSGOOD: She's not dead. She's in a pod somewhere. They need a live feed to the information in her brain. But she's fighting back. She's trying to take control, piece by piece.
DOCTOR: Texting?
OSGOOD: How much more human do you get? The Zygon probably doesn't even know it sent this, or why it misfired that bazooka.
DOCTOR: You don't know. It's just a theory.
OSGOOD: Yes, it's just a theory, but how's that hope phase now?
DOCTOR: Worse than ever.
OSGOOD: Then we've got a game.

[UNIT safe house]

Clara-Z walks past a mirror to a picture of the First Doctor, which she moves to reveal a safe with a keypad. She opens it, then goes back to the mirror when she realises that instead of a reflection, it showed Clara and her living room as she went by. But it is just a reflection now, so she returns to the safe, removes a laptop and switches it on.)
OSGOOD 2 [on screen]: Hello. If you're watching this, I have been captured and interrogated.
OSGOOD 1 [on screen]: During the interrogation, I have revealed to you the existence of the Osgood box.
(Switch to view of Clara-Z's increasingly annoyed face.)
OSGOOD ? [OC]: I have revealed its location and the combination to open this safe. And guess what?
BOTH [on screen]: I lied.
OSGOOD 2 [on screen]: The Osgood box exists. But it's not here, so stop looking.
OSGOOD 1 [on screen]: Really, stop.
OSGOOD 2 [on screen]: The Osgood box can end the ceasefire.
OSGOOD 1 [on screen]: The Osgood box can start the war. The Osgood box can wipe out all humankind. But there's a reason it's called the Osgood box.
OSGOOD 2 [on screen]: Haven't you guessed?
(Angry Clara-Z grabs the lap-top and throws it to the floor, stamping on it.)

[Road]

(The Doctor and Osgood go up to a police car.)
DOCTOR: Hello! Hi! Hello.
(The policemen wind down the window and he shows them his psychic paper.)
DOCTOR: Doctor John Disco. It was my plane. I had a big plane for purposes of er, poncing about.
(The policemen do not react.)
DOCTOR: It went off with a massive bang about half a mile that way? Actually, er, It's fine. We're, we're fine, aren't we?
OSGOOD: Yeah. Yeah.
DOCTOR: Yes, yes, yes, we're fine. Just, er, move along. (quietly to Osgood) Come on.
(They walk away. Osgood calls Clara back.)
OSGOOD: She's answered.
DOCTOR: Hello.

[UNIT Safe House / Road]

CLARA-Z: You're dead.
DOCTOR: Yes, well, I'm dead now, and I think I might be a bit more dead in a minute. What's your plan, Zygella?
(The police car is reversing to block access back to the beach.)
CLARA-Z: I don't have a plan.
DOCTOR: Come on, you don't invade planets without having kind of plan. That's why they're called planets, to remind you to plan it? Hey, hey! That's good! Pun-tastic. Doctor Pun-tastic! Oh, come on, that was a good one, Zygella!
(The policemen get out of the car to follow them.)
CLARA-Z: Don't call me Zygella. My name's Bonnie. My name's Bonnie. (quick wink)
DOCTOR: And you're winking at me.
CLARA-Z: I am not winking at you. Where is the Osgood box? (wink)
DOCTOR: You do know what winking means? You're sending out some very mixed messages here. You know I'm over two thousand years old? I'm old enough to be your Messiah.
(More policemen are approaching.)
CLARA-Z [OC]: I am not winking at you. Where is the box?
DOCTOR: We need some wheels. The van!
(They return to a VW van parked half on the pavement and half on double yellow lines.)
DOCTOR: Okay. Non-verbal communication. I assume that you never bothered to learn Morse code. (sotto) Specs! Setting 137.
(Osgood sonics the car doors open.)
CLARA-Z: Tell me!
DOCTOR: Okay, we'll have to try something else. Twenty questions. Where's your pod? Is it in a tunnel? Is it in London?
(Clara-Z feels her eyelids twitching and raises her hand to cover one then both of them.)
DOCTOR: Thanks very much. Gotcha!
(They get into the van, Osgood into the passenger seat, the Doctor is driving.)
DOCTOR: Stay where you are, Clara. We're coming to get you. And for God's sake, don't let her into your memories.
CLARA-Z: Memories? What memories? What has she got? Don't tell her where the Osgood box is, and above all, don't tell her what it is.

[Van]

(Call ends. The Doctor hands the phone back to Osgood, starts the engine and drives off with a little wheel-spin.)
OSGOOD: Obviously, the Zygon could hear that.
DOCTOR: Obviously.
OSGOOD: So she's going to poke around inside Clara's mind, looking for answers.
DOCTOR: The mind of Clara Oswald. She may never find her way out. (he chuckles.)
OSGOOD: I don't think I've ever seen you smile before.
DOCTOR: Dazzling, isn't it?
(Phone beeps.)
OSGOOD: Oh. I got a ping on Clara's phone. It's the location Bonnie sent the text from. A shopping centre, south London.
DOCTOR: Ah, London. Perpetual city, cradle of culture, here we come! Clara, stay safe.
OSGOOD: She's posted a video link.
(BBC News, of course.)
WOMAN [OC]: A video supposedly showing an alien in south London is posted across the internet.
OSGOOD: This is the same place Bonnie texted from. We need to hurry.

[Clara's living room]

(Clara-Z walks up to Clara's pod and taps on the window. The television comes to live.)
CLARA-Z [on screen]: Hello.
(Clara grabs the remote and tries to change channels.)
CLARA-Z [on screen]: Oh, there's no point turning over. There's nothing better on the other side. I could erase your mind.
CLARA: Then why haven't you?
(Clara-Z closes her eyes.)
CLARA: Having trouble?
(Clara closes her eyes.)
CLARA: Let's see what I can do.
(Clara-Z turns into a Zygon, falls down, then stands back up in human form again.)
CLARA: See, this thing works two ways, you know.
CLARA [OC]: I want those memories!
(Clara sits on the sofa to read her newspaper.)
CLARA: Trouble is, you're asking me for them, which means you can't access them, right?
CLARA-Z [in tunnel]: I can make you tell me.
CLARA: No, you can't, otherwise you would have done already.
CLARA-Z [in tunnel]: I can kill you.
CLARA: Go on, then.
CLARA-Z [in tunnel]: You think you're calling my bluff.
CLARA: I am calling your bluff. You need me alive.
CLARA-Z [OC]: Only as a source of information.
CLARA: Then you'd better start asking questions.
CLARA-Z [in tunnel]: You'd better not lie.
CLARA: (laughs) You see, that's the problem. I am a brilliant liar. How are you ever going to know?
CLARA-Z [on TV]: Oh, Clara. For a moment, I thought you were clever.
(Clara-Z puts two fingers to the pulse in her left arm. The heartbeat is heard.)
CLARA-Z [on TV]: Our hearts are linked. Beat for beat. The one thing you and I can never do is lie to each other.
(Clara checks her own heartbeat.)
CLARA-Z [in tunnel]: Oh, that scared you, didn't it?

[Fleet Estate]

(The van screeches to a halt. The Doctor and Osgood get out. She is tracking the exact location of the text and video, and has her own spectacles on again.)
DOCTOR: London! What a dump.
OSGOOD: London's okay.
DOCTOR: No, it's not, it's a dump.
OSGOOD: You spend an awful lot of time here, considering it's a dump.
DOCTOR: I spend an awful lot of time being kidnapped, tortured, shot at and exterminated. Doesn't mean I like it.
OSGOOD: Well, this is where the video was shot. Bonnie was here. Come on, Doctor.

[Fleet Estate Centre]

(The place is dark.)
DOCTOR: There's electricity in the air.
OSGOOD: It stinks. It smells like barbecues. (a few steps further in) Oh.
(Sizzling hairy lumps.)

[Tunnel / Clara's living room]

CLARA-Z: Now, listen to me. Here's what we're going to do. I'm going to ask you questions and if you don't tell me the exact and complete truth, I will know and I will kill you. Do you understand me?
CLARA: Yes.
CLARA-Z: I will slaughter you in that pod right now. Am I lying to you?
CLARA: No.
CLARA-Z: Good. Then we'll begin. Where is the Osgood box? You will answer me, Clara. Truth or consequences, lie and you die. Where is it?
CLARA: UNIT HQ. Under the Tower of London.
CLARA-Z: Where specifically?
CLARA: The Black Archive.
CLARA-Z: Ah, yes. The dark little storage facility for forbidden alien tech, where this all began. Who has access to it?
CLARA: The Osgoods.
CLARA-Z: Only the Osgoods?
CLARA: The Doctor sealed it up after the last time. Didn't want UNIT interfering with the ceasefire.
CLARA-Z: Don't avoid the question. Do only the Osgoods have access?
CLARA: The Doctor has access, too.
CLARA-Z: Who else? Ah. You. You have access?
CLARA: Yes.
CLARA-Z: Is it a key? Or a code? No, a pass. A key code? Give it to me now.
CLARA: I can't.
CLARA-Z: Interesting. You're not lying.
CLARA: No, I'm not.
CLARA-Z: But you have access of some kind.
CLARA: Obviously.
CLARA-Z: Give it to me now.
CLARA: I told you. I can't. You know I'm not lying, I can't give you access.
CLARA-Z: Okay, how do you get in there? How, physically, do you get in?
CLARA: It's automatic.
CLARA-Z: But how? Tell me!
CLARA: The door is keyed to my body print.
CLARA-Z: Ah, yes, your body print. You can't give me access, because I have access already. I'm you.
CLARA: Yes.
CLARA-Z: And what am I going to find? What's in the Osgood box? Clara?
CLARA: The box ends the ceasefire.
CLARA-Z: So I'm told. How?
CLARA: There's a button inside the box. Press it, it will transmit a signal that will unmask every Zygon on the planet for up to an hour. What's there to smile about?
CLARA-Z: Ah, mass panic followed by war. Every Zygon on our side at a stroke.
CLARA: Twenty million Zygons against seven billion humans. That's not a war you can win.
CLARA-Z: Then we will die in the fire, instead of living in chains.
CLARA: Most of your own kind don't want that.
CLARA-Z: Then it's time we stopped giving them a choice.
CLARA: It's time you asked the most important question.
CLARA-Z: Which is?
CLARA: I'm waiting.
CLARA-Z: Why's it called an Osgood box?
CLARA: I'm not telling you.
CLARA-Z: Good. I've been looking forward to hearing you scream.
CLARA: I'm not telling you, because when you get to the Black Archive, you'll find out for yourself. And when you do, you're going to want to speak to me again. Am I lying to you?
(The heartbeats say no.)
CLARA: See you later.
(She turns the TV off.)

[Fleet Estate Centre]

(Using flash lights.)
DOCTOR: What's your name?
OSGOOD: Osgood.
DOCTOR: No, no, no. Your first name?
OSGOOD: What's your first name?
DOCTOR: Basil.
OSGOOD: Petronella.
DOCTOR: Let's just, er, stick with what we had. I need to ask you, because it's important, because it might matter.
OSGOOD: What's important?
DOCTOR: Which one are you? Human or Zygon?
(A door opens nearby and something squelches. They run to find a Zygon, who in turn runs into a general store to try and hide. It turns back into the man from earlier, but not completely.)
DOCTOR: : We can help you.
ETOINE: It wasn't me. They attacked me. They saw me. I had to.
(The squelchy transformation should, but he doesn't change much, just the odd sucker. It clearly hurts.)
DOCTOR: It's okay, it's okay, it's okay. It's okay, it's okay.
ETOINE: A commander came. She turned me back! Argh!
OSGOOD: We can help. We can help you. Doctor, we can help him, can't we?
ETOINE: I'm not sure.
(A burst of electricity leaps from Etoine to the Doctor, who staggers briefly. Etoine runs.)
DOCTOR: Please! Come back! Come back!

[Tunnel]

(Kate enters with a Zygon escort.)
KATE: North America reporting back to High Command.
CLARA-Z: I'm going to the Black Archive. I'll open it up, you will follow.
KATE: Of course.
CLARA-Z: But first, locate the Doctor. If possible, duplicate him, and then kill him.
KATE: It will be my pleasure.

[Store room]

DOCTOR: I can't help you just now, but
(Another bolt of electricity leaves Etoine and grazes the Doctor.)
ETOINE: Why? I was happy like this. I was happy here.
DOCTOR: I understand.
ETOINE: I can't change. I can't hide.
OSGOOD: Let us help you.
ETOINE: No! You're Truth or Consequences.
OSGOOD: We're not. We're really not.
(Etoine transforms a little more.)
ETOINE: I'm not part of your fight. I never wanted to fight anyone, I just wanted to live here. Why can't I just live?
DOCTOR: We're on your side.
ETOINE: I'm not on anyone's side. This is my home.
DOCTOR: Listen, we are not them.
ETOINE: I can't go back now. You've taken my life!
(Etoine holds his hand up, palm towards his own face.)
DOCTOR: No, no, no! Stop! Stop! Stop,
ETOINE: They will kill me.
(Etoine commits suicide.)
DOCTOR: There it is, Osgood. There's their plan.

[Fleet Estate Centre]

(Walking back through the shopping centre.)
DOCTOR: Unmask everyone, provoke fear, paranoia, provoke a war.
KATE: Doctor.
(Her escort now look like UNIT soldiers.)
DOCTOR: Kate! Are you all right?
KATE: Of course I am. Why wouldn't I be?
DOCTOR: It's just I'd heard otherwise.
KATE: I'm fine. Doctor, we know where the Zygon command centre is. We know where Clara's pod is. We can take you there.
DOCTOR: Well, how very convenient, because that's just exactly what we're looking for.

[UNIT HQ]

CLARA-Z: And here it is, the Black Archive. Oh, I do like being you, Clara.
(Clara's pod is being wheeled on a box trolley by two UNIT soldiers.)
CLARA-Z: Everyone just waves you on past. Now, how does this work?
(She waves her left hand in front of a light and the vault door unlocks. Clara-Z leads the way in.)

[Tunnel]

(Kate leads the Doctor and Osgood to the pods, with the soldiers bringing up the rear.)
DOCTOR: Well, they like a good cave, don't they? How many of these pods are occupied?
KATE: We don't know.
DOCTOR: Which one is Clara's?
KATE: Well, that's strange. It was here before.
OSGOOD: Doctor, I think they're Zygons.
DOCTOR: Oh, you cheeky little monkeys!

[Black Archive]

CLARA-Z: Normalise.
(Her soldiers turn into Zygons. Clara-Z finds the room with a long table and the red Osgood box on the end of it.)
CLARA-Z: Well, Clara, I think you're reaching the end of your
(She steps into the room and sees something that shuts her up. Then her phone rings.)

[Tunnel]

(Kate is using the Zygon communicator.)
KATE: The Doctor is here.
CLARA-Z: Don't kill him. We need him alive.
KATE: What for?

[Black Archive]

CLARA-Z: Because I just found out why it's called an Osgood box.
(Move forward to reveal a blue box at the other end of the table.)

[Tunnel]

CLARA-Z [OC]: There's two of them.
DOCTOR: Two Osgoods, two boxes. Operation Double. What did you expect?

[Black Archive]

CLARA-Z: What's in them, Doctor? Tell me. Now!

[Tunnel]

DOCTOR: One box normalises all the Zygons.
CLARA-Z [OC]: And the other?
DOCTOR: Destroys them.

[Black Archive]

CLARA-Z: Which is which?

[Tunnel]

DOCTOR: Ah, that would be telling.

[Black Archive]

(Clara-Z walks out of the Archive and nods to the Zygon guards, who pull the top of Clara's pod. Clara stands. Then Clara-Z walks back into the Archive and puts her phone on the table as Clara is escorted in.)
CLARA-Z: Which box normalises the Zygons, Doctor? Tell me, or she dies.

[Tunnel / Black Archive]

DOCTOR: No. This is war. You pull the trigger, you pay the price.
CLARA-Z: Kill her.
(The Zygons put their hands to Clara's head.)
DOCTOR: The blue one! The blue one! The blue one normalises all your people.
(Clara-Z reaches out to the blue box, but doesn't touch it.)
CLARA-Z: Are you lying? Are you lying to me, Doctor?
DOCTOR: No, I'm not. And when you open up the box, you'll see I'm not lying.
(Clara-Z hits the top of the box. The lid opens to reveal a nicely carved Gallifreyan design with two red buttons, one labelled Truth, the other Consequences.)
CLARA-Z: Doctor?
(She opens the red box. It is the same.)
CLARA-Z: Doctor!
DOCTOR: Yeah, I know.
CLARA-Z: Bring him to me!

[Tunnel]

(The Zygons advance on the Doctor and Osgood. Kate shoots them in the back of their heads.)
KATE: Sorry, Doctor. Self-defence.
DOCTOR: You're you.
KATE: I'm me.
DOCTOR: How did you survive?
(Kate recalls the moment that Norlander transformed. She raised her gun and blam! blam! blam! blam! blam!)
KATE: Five rounds rapid.
(Angry Zygon Clara throws the mobile phone at the wall.)
KATE: I'm sorry, Doctor. I know you don't approve.
DOCTOR: Why does peacekeeping always involve killing?
(Kate drops the Zygon communicator and grinds it underfoot.)
DOCTOR: Is this the lot?
KATE: No, there are plenty more of them. They were the nearest. You are you?
OSGOOD: I'm me.
KATE: But human or Zygon?
OSGOOD: Me.
KATE: What are we dealing with?
DOCTOR: Twenty million Zygons about to be unmasked. You don't know whether they are human or not. And you can't fight them, not with soldiers.
KATE: Which leads me to a very big question.
DOCTOR: Oh, I was really hoping that it wouldn't.
KATE: The Zee-67, Sullivan's gas, the gas that kills the Zygons. You took it.
DOCTOR: Well, you know how it is. Daddy knows best.
KATE: That's what's in the red box, yes? Of course it is. If I remember rightly, it causes a chain reaction in the atmosphere. Turns every Zygon on Earth inside out.
DOCTOR: Let me negotiate peace. You can't commit mass murder
KATE: Then why did you leave the gas with us?
DOCTOR: The boxes are safeguards for both species. You agreed to that.
KATE: I never agreed to that.
DOCTOR: Yes, you did, then I wiped your memory. And you agreed to that, too. But that's why there were two Osgoods to police the ceasefire. One human and one Zygon, to keep the secrets and keep the peace.
KATE: I'm sorry, Doctor. Truly. But the peace is failing already. Come on.

[Black Archive]

CLARA: It's no good, Bonnie. You can't win.
CLARA-Z: I don't care.
DOCTOR: Hi! Hello! Hello!
(The two Zygons seize Clara.)
DOCTOR: Oh, hello! Hi. Hi. Stop this. Stop this, please. Let me take both of these boxes away. We'll forgive, we'll forget. And the ceasefire will stand.
CLARA-Z: No.
(Kate goes to the red box.)
KATE: Doctor, which of these buttons do I press? Doctor, which one? Truth or consequences?
(Bonnie aka Clara-Zygon stands at the blue box.)
CLARA-Z: Truth or consequences?
DOCTOR: This is the moment we've all been waiting for. Make your mind up time!
(He goes into American Game Show Host mode)
DOCTOR: : One of those buttons will destroy the Zygons, release the imbecile's gas. The other one detonates the nuclear warhead under the Black Archive. It'll destroy everyone in London. Bonnie. Bonnie, sweetheart! One of those buttons will unmask every Zygon in the world. The other one cancels their ability to change form. It'll make them human beings for ever. (normal) There are safeguards beyond safeguards. I did this on a very important day for me and this ceasefire will stand.
CLARA-Z: This is wrong.
DOCTOR: No, it's not.
CLARA-Z: You are responsible for all the violence. All of the suffering.
DOCTOR: No, I'm not.
CLARA-Z: Yes.
DOCTOR: No.
CLARA-Z: Yes. You engineered this situation, Doctor. This is your fault.
DOCTOR: No, it's not. It's your fault.
CLARA-Z: I had to do what I've done.
DOCTOR: So did I.
CLARA-Z: We've been treated like cattle.
DOCTOR: So what.
CLARA-Z: We've been left to fend for ourselves.
DOCTOR: So's everyone.
CLARA-Z: It's not fair.
DOCTOR: Oh, it's not fair! Oh, I didn't realise that it was not fair! Well, you know what? My Tardis doesn't work properly and I don't have my own personal tailor.
CLARA-Z: The things don't equate.
DOCTOR: These things have happened, Zygella. They are facts. You just want cruelty to beget cruelty. You're not superior to people who were cruel to you. you're just a whole bunch of new cruel people. A whole bunch of new cruel people being cruel to some other people, who'll end up being cruel to you. The only way anyone can live in peace is if they're prepared to forgive. Why don't you break the cycle?
CLARA-Z: Why should we?
DOCTOR: What is it that you actually want?
(After a long pause.)
CLARA-Z: War.
DOCTOR: Ah. Ah, right. And when this war is over, when you have a homeland free from humans, what do you think it's going to be like? Do you know? Have you thought about it? Have you given it any consideration? Because you're very close to getting what you want. What's it going to be like? Paint me a picture. Are you going to live in houses? Do you want people to go to work? Will there be holidays? Oh! Will there be music? Do you think people will be allowed to play violins? Who's going to make the violins? Well? Oh, you don't actually know, do you? Because, like every other tantrumming child in history, Bonnie, you don't actually know what you want. So, let me ask you a question about this brave new world of yours. When you've killed all the bad guys, and when it's all perfect and just and fair, when you have finally got it exactly the way you want it, what are you going to do with the people like you? The troublemakers. How are you going to protect your glorious revolution from the next one?
CLARA-Z: We'll win.
DOCTOR: Oh, will you? Well, maybe, maybe you will win! But nobody wins for long. The wheel just keeps turning. So, come on. Break the cycle.
CLARA-Z: Why are you still talking?
DOCTOR: Because I want to get you to see, and I'm almost there!
CLARA-Z: Do you know what I see, Doctor? A box. A box with everything I need. A fifty percent chance.
KATE: For us, too.
(Both women have their hands poised over the buttons. The Doctor resumes Games Host mode.)
DOCTOR: And we're off! Fingers on buzzers! Are you feeling lucky? Are you ready to play the game? Who's going to be quickest? Who's going to be luckiest?
KATE: This is not a game!
DOCTOR: No, it's not a game, sweetheart, and I mean that most sincerely.
(Do a search on Hughie Green if you don't get the reference.)
CLARA-Z: Why are you doing this?
KATE: Yes, I'd quite like to know that, too. You set this up. Why?
DOCTOR: Because it's not a game, Kate. This is a scale model of war. Every war ever fought, right there in front of you. Because it's always the same. When you fire that first shot, no matter how right you feel, you have no idea who's going to die! You don't know whose children are going to scream and burn! How many hearts will be broken! How many lives shattered! How much blood will spill until everybody does what they were always going to have to do from the very beginning. Sit down and talk! (sigh) Listen to me. Listen, I just, I just want you to think. Do you know what thinking is? It's just a fancy word for changing your mind.
CLARA-Z: I will not change my mind.
DOCTOR: Then you will die stupid. Alternatively, you could step away from that box, you can walk right out of that door and you could stand your revolution down.
CLARA-Z: No! I'm not stopping this, Doctor. I started it. I will not stop it. You think they'll let me go, after what I've done?
DOCTOR: You're all the same, you screaming kids. You know that? Look at me, I'm unforgivable. Well, here's the unforeseeable. I forgive you. After all you've done, I forgive you.
CLARA-Z: You don't understand. You will never understand.
DOCTOR: I don't understand? Are you kidding? Me? Of course I understand. I mean, do you call this a war? This funny little thing? This is not a war! I fought in a bigger war than you will ever know. I did worse things than you could ever imagine. And when I close my eyes I hear more screams than anyone could ever be able to count! And do you know what you do with all that pain? Shall I tell you where you put it? You hold it tight till it burns your hand, and you say this. No one else will ever have to live like this. No one else will have to feel this pain. Not on my watch!
(Kate closes the lid of the red box and steps back.)
DOCTOR: Thank you. Thank you.
KATE: I'm sorry.
DOCTOR: I know. I know. Thank you. (to Clara-Z) Well?
(Long, long pause.)
CLARA-Z: It's empty, isn't it? Both boxes. There's nothing in them. Just buttons.
DOCTOR: Of course. And do you know how you know that? Because you've started to think like me.
(Clara-Z drops her hand away from the buttons.)
DOCTOR: :It's hell, isn't it? No one should have to think like that. And no one will. Not on our watch. (their eyes meet) Gotcha.
CLARA-Z: How can you be so sure?
DOCTOR: Because you have a disadvantage, Zygella. I know that face.
KATE: This is all very well, but we know the boxes are empty now. We can't forget that.
DOCTOR: No, well, er, you've said that the last fifteen times.
(He sonics the memory filter in the ceiling. Bang!  Osgood leans an unconscious Kate against a rack of stuff. Clara-Z closes the blue box.)
CLARA-Z: You didn't wipe my memory.
DOCTOR: No. Just Kate's. Oh, and your little friend's here, of course. (the Zygons) When they wake up, they won't remember what you've done. It'll be our secret.
CLARA-Z: You're going to protect me?
OSGOOD: You're one of us now, whether you like it, or not.
CLARA-Z: I don't understand how you could just forgive me.
DOCTOR: Because I've been where you have. There was another box. I was going to press another button. I was going to wipe out all of my own kind, man, woman and child. I was so sure I was right.
CLARA-Z: What happened?
DOCTOR: The same thing that happened to you. I let Clara Oswald get inside my head. Trust me. She doesn't leave.

[Zygon Command Centre]

(Clara-Z goes through the Drakeman Junior School boiler room to the giant Command polyp, and manipulates its fronds.)
CLARA-Z: Zygon High Command. The ceasefire is back in place. The rebels are standing down. You are all (pause) safe.
(She transforms into a Zygon to move the last frond.)

[Brockwell Park]

OSGOOD: The Tardis.
DOCTOR: The Tardis.
OSGOOD: What does it stand for?
DOCTOR: What? You're kidding me? Surely you know that?
OSGOOD: Well, I've heard a couple of different versions.
DOCTOR: I made it up from the initials. It stands for Totally And Radically Driving In Space. Do you want to come? All of the future, all of history, and all of the universe?
OSGOOD: More than anything. But I think I have to stay. I've got a couple of boxes to keep an eye on. And a world to keep safe.
DOCTOR: Fair enough. Clara, would you mind er
CLARA: Mind what?
DOCTOR: I'll see you in the Tardis, okay?
CLARA: (penny drops) Er, yeah, sure.
(She goes and hugs Osgood.)
CLARA: Take care, you.
OSGOOD: You take care of him. Don't let him die or anything.
CLARA: What if he's really annoying?
OSGOOD: Then fine.
CLARA: Got ya.
(Clara goes into the Tardis and shuts the door.)
DOCTOR: I need to know. Which one are you?
OSGOOD: I'm Osgood.
DOCTOR: Human or Zygon?
OSGOOD: I'll answer that question one day. Do you know when day that will be?
OSGOOD [OC]: The day nobody cares about the answer.
(A second Osgood in 7th Doctor duffel coat, paisley scarf etc steps out from behind Osgood, where we know there was no one before. Her spectacles haven't got a mend on the bridge.)
OSGOOD 2: Gotcha!
OSGOOD: Oh, look at his face.
OSGOOD 2: It's almost not fair.
DOCTOR: (stuttering) But I don't, I don't. How, how?
OSGOOD: Oh, think it through, Doctor.
OSGOOD 2: Well, it wouldn't be right, would it?
OSGOOD: To carry on using Clara's face
OSGOOD 2: When there's a vacancy.
DOCTOR: Zygella?
OSGOOD: Osgood!
DOCTOR: But which one of you
BOTH: Osgood!
OSGOOD: It doesn't matter which of us is which.
OSGOOD 2: All that matters is that Osgood lives.
OSGOOD: And nothing's going to stop us!
DOCTOR: You're a credit to your species, Petronella Osgood.
OSGOOD: No, Basil.
OSGOOD 2: We're a credit to both of them.
DOCTOR: Oh, and you should know. I'm a very big fan.
(He goes into the Tardis and shuts the door.)

[Tardis]

CLARA: So, you must have thought I was dead for a while?
DOCTOR: Yeah.
CLARA: How was that?
DOCTOR: Longest month of my life.
CLARA: It could only have been five minutes.
DOCTOR: I'll be the judge of time.
(He pulls the lever and the Tardis dematerialises.)

[Brockwell Park]

OSGOOD: Ice creams?
OSGOOD 2: Yes, ice creams. Then back to work.
OSGOOD: What's today?
OSGOOD 2: Oh, you know, same old, same old. Defending the Earth.
(The Osgoods look at each other and use their inhalers, then walk away side by side.)

(Transcriber's note: Watching this one gave me a headache, literally, what with the static flashes and frequent point of view changes - colour for a person, black and white for external. Yes, Mister Gatiss, very clever I'm sure. So I haven't documented them all. I just cannot be bothered. Just the important (I think) ones.)

(A screen full of static.)
RASSMUSSEN [OC]: You must not watch this.
(The image clears to reveal a man's face. He wears large spectacles, and speaks directly to the viewer.)
RASSMUSSEN: I'm warning you. You can never unsee it. (static flicker)  But if you do watch. Gagan Rassmussen. I'm Gagan Rassmussen. This is Le Verrier lab in orbit around Neptune.
(He turns as something large groans unseen in the background.)
RASSMUSSEN: I've put things together into some kind of order so that you can,er, understand, so that you can have some idea. There are bits missing. Sorry about that. I don't fully understand what's been going on here,  but, er, this is what happened.
(The screen is filled with apparently random letters and numbers, but which actually spell out the names of the characters and location across, and Doctor Who illuminated vertically.

[Rescue ship]

(A soldier is kneeling, checking a rifle.)
CHOPRA: Stop staring!
(His face is framed by a facial recognition software, and his details pulled from his file. Chopra. (Osamu Aimi Chopra)  Age: 28. Rank: Conscript. Survival rating 7/10)
RASSMUSSEN [OC]: They came from Triton. This is Chopra. Bit of an attitude, in my opinion.
(A stocky soldier with a white face that has black lines up and down and across it turns away.)
NAGATA: (woman with a Geordie accent) Calm down, pet.
CHOPRA: Well, it's ridiculous. That thing's meant to be a lethal fighting machine and it just moons around like a love-sick puppy.
(A soldier sits up from from an opening pod and puts on his helmet. Neon blue tubes are still attached to him.)
DEEP-ANDO: I could hear you ranting from inside the pod, Chopra, for the Gods' sake.
NAGATA: Feel better?
RASSMUSSEN [OC]: Commander Nagata. Young, for the responsibility. Quite a baptism of fire, I'm afraid.
(Nagata. (Jagganth Daiki-Nagata) Age: 30. Rank: Officer 2nd Class. Survival rating 8/10
DEEP-ANDO: Marvellous, ma'am. All hail, Morpheus, eh?
RASSMUSSEN [OC]: Deep-Ando. Conscript. Likes to think of himself as the joker of this little group. Well, he did.
(Deep-Ando. (Haruka Deep-Ando) Age: 40. Rank: Conscript 2nd Class. Survival rating 6/10)
CHOPRA: Morpheus, Morpheus, Morpheus. Sleep's the one thing left to us. The one thing they couldn't get their filthy mitts on. Now, they're even grabbing that. Colonising it.
NAGATA: Spoken like a true Rip.
CHOPRA: Oh, don't call me that.
NAGATA: Don't call me that, ma'am. Give it a rest, pet.
CHOPRA: Give what a rest?
NAGATA: This is a mission, Chopra. We find out what's happened on Le Verrier and then we all go home. Keep your politics to yourself, okay?
DEEP-ANDO: I know someone who'd love to get Chopra back home to Triton, eh? Ho-ho!
(He goes to the person with the strange face.)
RASSMUSSEN [OC]: This one's obvious from the markings, isn't it. We all know a Grunt when we see one.
(474. Age 5. Rank: Grunt. Survival rating 9/10.)
(474 takes a step forward and Deep-Ando backs away, hands raised.)
DEEP-ANDO: Whoa, whoa.
NAGATA: Come on. Behave.
(We see they are flying through space to a satellite station above a very blue gas giant.)
NAGATA: Nearly there, kiddies.
RASSMUSSEN [OC]: These are the rescue crew. Don't get too attached. Everything you're about to see is from their individual viewpoints or taken from the station itself.
(A monitor says 2 minutes to docking.)
RASSMUSSEN [OC]: The only footage available.

RASSMUSSEN: They came to find me. This is my station. My lab.

[Corridor]

RASSMUSSEN [OC]: I've pieced together the rescue as best I could. If you're going to watch, then pay close attention. Your lives may depend on it.
(The team go down the docking tunnel to the station itself. Static flash on screen.)
NAGATA: Emergency lighting only.
CHOPRA: Grav and orbit's stable. There must be power.
(The doors to the docking tunnel close and they move on, lighting the way with flashlights on their rifles.)
NAGATA: Nothing?
(474 shakes her head.)
NAGATA: No sign of anyone.

RASSMUSSEN: There was no crew. No crew left. They did find others, though. Strangers.

[Corridor]

NAGATA: What the hell happened here?
474: Hide seek. Maybe they play hide seek.
CHOPRA: Hide and seek! Why do they miss out words? It's infuriating.
474: Chopra, don't be anger.
CHOPRA: Don't be an-gry! Is it so hard to breed them to speak properly?
DEEP-ANDO: Oh, lighten up.
(474 holds up a clenched fist and they all stop.)
CHOPRA: What now?
474: Talk.
CHOPRA: What?
474: People talk.
CLARA [OC]: Do you ever get the feeling like you're being watched?
(The soldiers move quietly but quickly to a junction with another corridor.)
DOCTOR [OC]: Paranoia.
CLARA [OC]: Why is it so dark?
DOCTOR [OC]: Night-time setting. Faulty filament. Three-day week.
CLARA [OC]: So, orbit around Neptune?
DOCTOR [OC]: Yeah. This close into the planet, they must have some pretty powerful anti-grav shielding on board.
(Clara's flash light reveals an oriental mask on a red wall.)
CLARA: Looks like a Japanese restaurant. Oh! Have you brought me to a space restaurant?
DOCTOR [OC]: People never do that, you know?
CLARA: Do what?
DOCTOR: They never put the word space in front of something just because everything's all sort of hi-tech and future-y. It's never space restaurant or space champagne or space, you know, hat. It's just restaurant, champagne or hat.
(The soldiers follow them as they walk.)
DOCTOR: Even if this was a restaurant
CLARA: What about spacesuit?
DOCTOR: Pedant.
(The Doctor and Clara turn as they hear the energy rifles powering up, eyes wide like rabbits in caught in car headlights.)
DOCTOR: Hello.
CLARA: Are you crew? Are you crew?
(The Doctor carefully reaches into his inside jacket pocket and gets out his psychic paper. He holds up up to each soldier until -)
NAGATA: Engineering stress assessors?
DOCTOR: Yes. Yes, we are.
(He puts the psychic paper away again.)
DOCTOR: We're here to, er.
CLARA: We're here to assess stress.
DOCTOR: Stress.
NAGATA: So, what happened?
DOCTOR: From the beginning of time? That's a very long story.
CLARA: (sotto) Doctor.
DOCTOR: Well. Well, we just arrived, you know, and there was nobody about. What are you doing here?
(Nagata lowers her rifle.)
NAGATA: Twenty four hours ago, this station fell silent. No comm signal. Nothing. Dead. We've come to find out why.
DOCTOR: Theories?
NAGATA: Could be anything. Meteorite strike. Space pirates.
CLARA: Ah, see? Not just pirates, space pirates.
DOCTOR: So, what, you are a rescue mission?
NAGATA: Yes.
DOCTOR: Of four?
NAGATA: Cuts, pet. Right, you're to consider yourself
DOCTOR: (sings)  Part of the furniture! 
NAGATA: Under my command.
DOCTOR: Okay. Really?
NAGATA: Yes, really. Come on.
DOCTOR: (sotto) Okay.
(The Doctor and Clara follow at a short distance.)
CLARA: We still don't know where we are.
DOCTOR: Indo-Japanese.
(He wets his finger and holds it behind his right ear. We are apparently watching from a wall screen.)
DOCTOR: Thirty eighth century. (tastes his finger again.) Tuesday.
CLARA: Thirty eighth century?
DOCTOR: Hmm. After the Great Catastrophe, there was a tectonic realignment. India and Japan, they were sort of merged.
CLARA: We still don't know where the rest of the crew are, though. I mean, a place this size? Hey, what? Great Catastrophe? What Great Catastrophe?
DOCTOR: Well, you've got all that to look forward to, haven't you? Mind you, this place looks as if it's been dead for a long while now.
(He runs his finger along an edge then blows a lot of dust off it, and looks straight at us. Static flicker to change of scene / viewpoint. They have caught up with the soldiers again.)
DOCTOR: What is it?
CLARA: I still can't shake the feeling.
474: Eyes. Watch. Eyes in sky.
CHOPRA: What the hell is that supposed to mean?
474: Chopra not worry. 474 protect Chopra. Chopra pretty.
(474 reaches to stroke Chopra's cheek and he slaps the hand away.)
CHOPRA: Oh, for the Gods'. Just back off!
(Chopra pushes 474 who reacts by getting behind him and putting on a choke hold.)
DEEP-ANDO Oh, come on now.
NAGATA: Let him go, pet!
474: 474 sorry.
NAGATA: Let him go, now!
474: Not help it!
(The software display tells us that 474 is programmed to respond to physical threat. She releases Chopra from the choke hold and crouches by the wall, whimpering.)
CHOPRA: It could have killed me!
NAGATA: That's how they're grown. You know that. They react to any attack.
CLARA: Grown?
NAGATA: They might not give them much upstairs, but our friend here certainly knows how to fight.
(The Doctor kneels in front of 474.)
NAGATA: You'd be glad of her in a tight corner, I'll bet.
CLARA: What does she mean, grown?
DOCTOR: She's a Grunt, Clara. They're bred in hatcheries. Cloned muscles. Low intelligence. Brute force. Instant army.
CLARA: That's disgusting.
DOCTOR: Well, that's how they roll in the thirty eighth century.
(Something large growls and moans.)
DOCTOR: (sotto) Hold my hand.
CLARA: I'm okay.
DOCTOR: I'm not.
(Clara takes the Doctor's hand.)
(Another growl nearby, and they panic as the lights on the rifles briefly illuminate two humanoid creatures ahead of them.. Some shots are fired, then they turn and -)
DOCTOR: Oh, run, run, run! Run! Run!
(At a junction.)
DEEP-ANDO: Follow me! Straight ahead.
NAGATA: No! This way! Deep-Ando!
DEEP-ANDO [OC]: Come on!

[Laboratory]

DOCTOR: Quick! Push anything in front of it! We've got to keep them out!
(The Doctor moves a cabinet as Chopra tries to push the door shut.)
NAGATA: Deep-Ando! We've lost him! What the hell are they?
DOCTOR: Not pirates.
NAGATA: We've got to get Deep-Ando!
DOCTOR: Where's your friend?
CHOPRA: Deep-Ando? I dunno. He's
NAGATA: He's still out there!
(The creatures are pushing at the door. One thrusts an arm through the gap.)
NAGATA: 474!
(474 charges the door, shutting it and cutting off the arm, which turns to sand and falls to the floor.)
NAGATA: What the hell are they? Where did they go?

[Corridor]

DEEP-ANDO: Chief Nagata, this is Deep-Ando. Where did you go? Nagata, this is Deep-Ando. May the Gods look favourably upon you. (static) May the Gods. Are you there?
(He walks on, sweeping his flash light around as he goes.)

[Laboratory]

NAGATA: Deep-Ando, this is Nagata. May the Gods look favourably upon you. Deep-Ando, are you there?
(The Doctor takes a sample of the sand from the floor and puts it under a microscope.)
NAGATA: What are you doing?
DOCTOR: Finding out what they're made of.
NAGATA: Deep-Ando, are you there?
CHOPRA: Send the Grunt.
NAGATA: No.
CHOPRA: Why not? That's what it's for. Look, he's still out there! You can't just abandon him.
NAGATA: I need proper intel before I risk anyone else, including 474. Keep trying the comms.
CHOPRA: Deep-Ando, may the Gods look favourably upon you.
NAGATA: Well?
DOCTOR: Organic. Definitely organic. Blood cells. Skin cells. Mucus.
474: Deep-Ando, may the Gods look favourably upon you. Deep-Ando.
(Clara is standing between two large white cabinets.)
CLARA: What are these?
CHOPRA: Morpheus?
CLARA: Morpheus? Named after the God of Dreams? Oh, yeah. Ooh, yeah. Not just this.
(She indicates her pretty face.)
CLARA: So, what are they, then? Sleep pods?
CHOPRA: More than that. (static) Deep-Ando? Deep-Ando, can you hear me?
NAGATA: Keep trying.
DOCTOR: I could take a look at that. You know, triangulate the signal, help you find your friend.
NAGATA: First, tell me what those things are.
CHOPRA: Deep, Deep-Ando.
DEEP-ANDO [OC]: (sotto) This is Deep
CHOPRA: Deep-Ando, this is Chopra. I'm getting a signal. Deep-Ando, can you hear me? Deep-Ando? Deep-Ando, this is Chopra. Can you hear me?
CLARA: Doctor!
(Thud. Clara has disappeared inside a Morpheus cabinet.)
DOCTOR: Clara!
(An alarm sounds, then four small holographic ladies in Dior New Style dresses with full skirts appear on the cabinet and start singing Pat Ballard's 1954 hit, just like the Chordettes did.)
SINGERS:  Bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom. Mister Sandman, bring me your dreams. 
DOCTOR: Clara!
NAGATA: It's fine, it's just Morpheus.
SINGERS:  Make him the cutest that I've ever seen. 
(The singers vanish as the Doctor opens the cabinet. Clara is lying there, eyes closed and with neon blue tubes attached to her head and hands.)
DOCTOR: What did you think you were doing?
(She opens her eyes and he removes the tubing.)
CLARA: Huh? (she sits up) It dragged me in. The wires, they were like snakes, like it was alive.
DOCTOR: Are you okay?
CLARA: Yeah. It just kind of flicked over my eyes. Did I sleep?
CHOPRA: Yeah, you did.
CLARA: Why, why did it just grab at me?
DOCTOR: Semi-sentient. It thinks it knows what's good for you. You obviously needed forty winks. Clever little sleep pod. You said it was something more than that, though.
(Static flicker on picture.)
NAGATA: Come on, everyone knows.
DOCTOR: (to camera) Well, let's just say, for the sake of argument, that we don't. What is Morpheus?
474: Last pod. This pod. Not empty.
(The Doctor puts on his sonic sunglasses. The singers return on the last pod.)
SINGERS:  Bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom. 
DOCTOR: Oh, no. No, no. enough of that.
(He pulls out a 38th century square DVD and they vanish. He takes off his glasses then tries to force down the shutter over the observation hatch where the sleeper's head should be.)
DOCTOR: It's almost like someone's
(He nearly gets it open and it slams shut again.)
CLARA: Careful!
(Weapons are powered up.)
CLARA: Here. Let me try.
(She listens to the regular buzz from the pod then taps on the metal cover.)
CLARA: Hellooo? It's okay. We're not going to hurt you. Will you open up now? Come on. Let's er, let's start with names, shall we?  Er I'm Clara. This is the Doctor.
(The hatch opens.)
CLARA: It's okay.
(Rassmussen pokes his head out of the pod. Freeze image.)
RASSMUSSEN [OC]: Ah, this is where I come in.

RASSMUSSEN: Hello. I wanted to get out of there. Immediately. Of course I did. But er, this man, the Doctor, he wanted explanations first. So

[Laboratory]

(A large holographic disembodied lady's head appears above the pods.)
PRESENTER: May the Gods look favourably upon us all. Friends. We live in a time of unparalleled prosperity. A golden age of peace, harmony and industry. But every shift must come to an end. Every working day must stop.
(A holographic yawning woman appears on her outsized hand.)
PRESENTER: Of course, we can take stimulants to make that deadline, to keep us propped up through that important meeting. But always, always, sleep claims us in the end.
(The woman lies down to sleep.)
PRESENTER: Until now.
DOCTOR: Sleep-deprivation pods?
CHOPRA: Not exactly.
PRESENTER: Welcome, Morpheus.
SINGERS [OC]:  Bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom. (song continues underneath dialogue) 
PRESENTER: The Morpheus machine concentrates the whole nocturnal experience into one five minute burst. Now, you can go a whole month without sleep.
CLARA: A month?
PRESENTER: All the chemical benefits of rest, but freeing up the nights to continue working, working, working. To get the edge on your competitor. To turn that extra profit.
CLARA: That's insane. That's horrible!
CHOPRA: Finally, someone who sees it for what it is.
PRESENTER: Leave the Rip Van Winkles behind and become one of a new generation of Wide-Awakes! The future is here. The future is now. Let yourself slip into the arms of Morpheus!
SINGERS [OC]:  Mister Sandman, bring me a dream. 
(The Presenter's head vanishes.)
DOCTOR: But sleep is
(And reappears.)
PRESENTER: Terms and conditions apply.
(And gone again.)
DOCTOR: Sleep is vital. Sleep is wonderful. Even I sleep.
CLARA: When?
DOCTOR: Well, when you're not looking.
(The Doctor leans forward and stares at us. The viewpoint turns look at the next speaker, and keeps swinging around as others join in the conversation.)
RASSMUSSEN: Morpheus is mine. My invention. It's changed Triton society forever.
DOCTOR: So, how does it work?
RASSMUSSEN: Er, the pod sends out a coded electronic signal that acts on certain parts of the brain. Changes the fundamental chemistry.
CHOPRA: It's disgusting. Making people into bloody drones. I've said it before
NAGATA: Aye, you have.
CHOPRA: Colonising our sleep. Is nothing sacred?
RASSMUSSEN: We spend a third of our lives asleep. And time is money.
NAGATA: He's right, man. It's amazing. Everyone on Triton's using it.
DOCTOR: Are they now? Sleep, that knits up the ravelled sleeve of care. The death of each day's life, sore labour's bath. Balm of hurt minds, chief nourisher in life's great feast. Congratulations, Professor. You've revolutionised the labour market. You've conquered nature.
RASSMUSSEN: Thank you.
DOCTOR: You've also created an abomination.

RASSMUSSEN: The Doctor said that we had to find the other soldier. And to find answers. So, we left the lab. He thought that there was some connection between my Morpheus process and those creatures that attacked us.  Anyway, you'll see, he had a theory.

[Corridor]

(We are watching from Clara's viewpoint.)
CHOPRA: Sleep dust?
DOCTOR: Sleep dust.
NAGATA: You're kidding.
DOCTOR: Well do I look like I'm kidding? Is this a kidding face? Ask the crew of this station if they're kidding. Or what's left of them.
NAGATA: But sleep dust?
DOCTOR: Yes. The stuff in the corner of your eye. The stuff you wipe away every morning when you wake up.
RASSMUSSEN: That's ridiculous. This is getting us nowhere.
CLARA: Okay, how, Doctor? How can those things be made of sleep dust?
DOCTOR: Well, when we sleep, the mucus crust builds up in our eyes. Blood cells, skin cells. That's what dust largely is. Human skin. But your meddling has evolved it. Hot-housed it. What used to be sleep in your eye has turned into a carnivorous life form.
RASSMUSSEN: You can't just throw accusations like that around!
CLARA [OC]: So, the longer you're in Morpheus, the more the dust builds up?
RASSMUSSEN: That's slander!
(Static flicker.)
DOCTOR: Lying there in those pods, people are a ready-made food source.
CLARA [OC]: Well, where are they, then?
(We switch to Nagata's viewpoint.)
CLARA: Where's the crew?
DOCTOR: Digested.
NAGATA: Come on, we need to find Deep-Ando.

[Another corridor]

(Deep-Ando is looking at a projected schematic of the local area, a corridor joining with another that appears to run all the way round the spacestation.)
DEEP-ANDO: Come on. Oh, come on. Must be an exit here somewhere. (activates comms) Listen to me. Those things, they're everywhere. For the Gods' sake, come and get me.
(A roar nearby.)

[Corridor]

(Mostly from Clara's viewpoint, apart from the occasional black and white external)
NAGATA: What about us? We've all used the pods back on Triton.
CHOPRA: Not all of us.
NAGATA: This isn't a good time to be smug, pet.
DOCTOR: Well, my guess is that the ones you're using are pretty primitive compared to what's going on up here. These are a sort of a Mark Two, yeah?
RASSMUSSEN: Obviously, I have tried to improve the process. Speed things up.
DOCTOR: You've succeeded there.
NAGATA: But how does the dust become those creatures?
DOCTOR: You saw what happened. The dust conglomerates and moulds itself into humanoid form. It's adaptable. It's clever.
(A loud long noise nearby. They power the weapons up.)
DOCTOR: And it's coming for us.
RASSMUSSEN: Look, you came to rescue the crew. I'm crew, so rescue me!
CLARA: How come you're the only one left?
RASSMUSSEN: Because I hid. I hid in the only place I thought those monsters wouldn't find me.  Look, we've got to get out of here!
DOCTOR: No. We can't leave this place until there's not a trace of the dust or your machines left. Or that's it for your lot.
NAGATA: Our lot? What do you mean?
DOCTOR: Oh, the human race.

[Storage area]

(Deep-Ando's light sweeps over containers and stuff and sees a bulkhead door. He puts his hand on the keypad. Most of this is views through the grid of the pad, computer's point of view.)
COMPUTER: Hey.
DEEP-ANDO: Haruka Deep-Ando, 6897. Let me in.
COMPUTER: I'd love to.
DEEP-ANDO: Well, do it then. Me ID must be on the Corporation index.
COMPUTER: You have to do the song.
DEEP-ANDO: What?
COMPUTER: You have to do the song, Deep-Ando 6897.
DEEP-ANDO: I haven't got time for this.
COMPUTER: Do the song, please.
DEEP-ANDO: What the hell are you talking about?
COMPUTER: After the Maha Shivaratri slash Oshogasu slash Christmas party, some of the crew reprogrammed me.
DEEP-ANDO: They did, did they?
COMPUTER: Yes. In order to enter rooms, everyone must do the song. It's very amusing.
DEEP-ANDO: But you know who I am. You've just called me by my name.
COMPUTER: 'Nevertheless.
DEEP-ANDO: Oh, ffff. What song?
COMPUTER: You know the one.
DEEP-ANDO: I don't!
COMPUTER: Now you're just being silly. Of course you do. Silly Deep-Ando 6897. You must know the song. Everyone here knows it.
(Groaning echoes around him.)
DEEP-ANDO: I'm not from this station. I'm on a rescue mission.
COMPUTER:  Bom bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom. 
DEEP-ANDO: Morpheus?
COMPUTER: The Morpheus song!
DEEP-ANDO: Oh, this is insane!
COMPUTER: The song, please.
DEEP-ANDO: Morpheus.  Mister Sandman, bring me your dreams. Make it the cutest  Haruka Deep-Ando 6897. Let me in!
COMPUTER: More, please.
DEEP-ANDO:  Give him two lips like roses in  Please, let me in. Let me in!
(Two of the creatures are there.)
DEEP-ANDO: Let me in!
(Deep-Ando screams. The bulkhead doors close in front of the creatures. In the observation room, with a nice big window looking out on Neptune, Deep-Ando checks his station schematic projected onto it. Then he turns to see the gaping maw of a creature.)

RASSMUSSEN: Er, he was the first of them to die. We heard the scream but er, well, we, we had our own problems.

[Laboratory]

(The spacestation is shaking violently. Everyone is hanging onto something for dear life.)
CHOPRA: What's happening?
NAGATA: Engines?
CHOPRA: No! It's the gravity shields! They're failing!
(Neptune is getting closer through the window.)
DOCTOR: Nagata! That thing, the schematic. Give it to me!
NAGATA: Who the hell do you think you are?
DOCTOR: Me? I'm in charge.
NAGATA: You have no authority
DOCTOR: No, but I'm in charge. I can bypass the main systems and reboot the grav-shields!
CLARA: Listen to him, for God's sake! He knows what he's talking about!
(Nagata lets go to hand the Doctor her helmet and they slide on the floor.)
CLARA: Doctor? Doctor, if the grav-shields are decaying
DOCTOR: Don't say it. Please don't say it!
CLARA: We're being pulled towards Neptune!
CHOPRA: Oh, Gods! Oh, Gods! Oh, Gods!
DOCTOR: Hang on!
CLARA: Argh, this day couldn't get any worse!
(A creature smashes a small glass window in the door, and opens it. The Doctor is projecting the schematic onto a cabinet door.)
DOCTOR: I can do this! I can fix this!
RASSMUSSEN: No! Please! Help me. Argh!
(A creature looms over him.)
CLARA: No! No!
DOCTOR: The G-force is increasing the closer we get to the planet! Hold on!
(A creature reaches out, bits falling off it. Static flicker.)
DOCTOR: We're back online! Grav-shields fixed! We're rising! Go. let's get out of here! Go, go! Out of here. Come on!
NAGATA: Chopra! 474! Come on!
DOCTOR: Keep going, move it, move it, move it!

[Cold store]

DOCTOR: Nagata!
NAGATA: No, I can't leave them!
(The Doctor pulls her inside and closes the door.)
NAGATA: Chopra. 474. May the Gods. Where are you?!
(They are running down a corridor, still alive.)
CLARA: Oh, God. Of all the places! A cold store. Nagata, are you okay?
NAGATA: No, I'm not.
CLARA: What about the others?
DOCTOR: I don't know.
CLARA: We have to go after them.
DOCTOR: Don't be ridiculous.
CLARA: Doctor!
NAGATA: They're under my command. I owe it to them.
DOCTOR: To die? They wouldn't thank you for that. Nor you, Clara. To die, to die. Glamis hath murdered sleep, therefore Cawdor shall sleep no more. Macbeth shall sleep no more.
NAGATA: What?
(Clara's point of view.)
DOCTOR: Shakespeare. He really knew his stuff. They all did. The Ancients. The poets. All those sad songs. All those lullabies. Sleep is essential to every sentient being in the universe. But to humans. Greedy, filthy, stupid humans. It's an inconvenience to be bartered away. Well, now we know the truth. Sleep isn't just a function. It's blessed. Every night we dive deep into that inky pool, deep into the arms of Morpheus. Every morning, we wake up and wipe the sleep from our eyes, and that keeps us safe. Safe from the monsters inside.
NAGATA: Well, the bloody monsters are outside now. What do we do?
(Thud! They turn and move into the area where meat is hanging from hooks in labelled covers.)
NAGATA: Dead meat.

[Corridor]

CHOPRA: Dear Gods, what are we going to do?
474: Get ship. Go home.
CHOPRA: We can't let those things off here. If they were to get out, to spread. It's like an infection. You don't understand, do you?
474: Sleepmen bad. Kill sleepmen.
CHOPRA: Yeah. That about sums it up. Chief Nagata, this is Chopra. May the Gods look favourably upon you. Chief Nagata, this is Chopra. May the. We'll head for the rescue ship. If we don't hear from them soon, I'm going to have to assume they're dead.
474: Then what Chopra do?
CHOPRA: I have no choice. I'll have to destroy this whole station.

[Cold store]

(The Doctor has donned his sonic sunglasses and is projecting an image on the wall of himself and Clara when they first came on board.)
NAGATA: What are you doing?
DOCTOR: I've hacked into your helmet cams.
NAGATA: What?
DOCTOR: Reviewing the footage. There's something not right here.
NAGATA: We don't have helmet cams.
DOCTOR: Why did it kill Rassmussen like that?
CLARA: That's what they do, isn't it? Kill people?
(The Doctor removes his glasses.)
DOCTOR: But that's a direct attack. That's not how they operate. Dust grows. Consumes the host.
CLARA: They evolve. You said so yourself.
DOCTOR: Maybe. There's something going on here. Something we're not getting.

[Corridor]

(Black and white view of a Morpheus pod gliding along above the walkway.)
COMPUTER: Please stand clear of the pod. Dangerous materials in transit.

[Cold store]

CLARA: What now? We can't stay in here. We're going to freeze to death. And we can't go back out there because the Sandmen will get us.
(Static flicker.)
DOCTOR: Sandmen?
CLARA: Yeah, it's a good name. It fits, like the song.  Bom, bom, bom. 
DOCTOR: No, you don't get to name things. I'm the Doctor. I do the naming.
CLARA: All right. Sorry.
DOCTOR: It's like the Silurians all over again.
CLARA: Okay, well, what would you prefer then? The Dustmen?
DOCTOR: Sandmen. (to Nagata) What did you just say?
CLARA: When?
DOCTOR: One point eight three minutes ago.
NAGATA: I said we don't have helmet cams.
(Banging on the door. Roaring. They hide amongst the hanging meat.)
CLARA: Doctor, that door isn't going to last much longer.
NAGATA: So, what do we do?
DOCTOR: We let them in.
NAGATA: What?
DOCTOR: We let them in.

RASSMUSSEN: Hmm. Clever, that. Clever strategy. If they'd stayed in there, they'd have frozen to death, so the Doctor had to let the creatures in. That was his theory. Oh, I'm not dead. You've probably guessed that by now.

(The sound of heartbeats as the creatures prowl the cold storage. Our heroes are hiding inside empty meat sacks. Suddenly, Boom!)

[Corridor]

474: What happen?
CHOPRA: Must be damage from when we fell out of orbit.
(There is a fire blocking the corridor in front of them.)
CHOPRA: We have to go back.
(But there is at least one Sandman behind them.)
CHOPRA: I don't know what to do. I can't save us.
474: 474 can.
CHOPRA: What?
(Thump. She knocks Chopra out then picks him up and walks through the flames.)

[Cold store]

(The Doctor looks out of his sack then gestures, first covering his eyes then the shush sign.)
RASSMUSSEN [OC]: The Doctor worked it out. The creatures can't see.
(Clara gestures to Nagata. They tiptoe past the Sandmen then the Doctor accidentally kicks something, alerting them.)
DOCTOR: Run! Engine room!
(He shuts the Sandmen in the cold store.)

[Corridor]

CHOPRA: What happened?
474: 474 help.
(474 is badly injured. Chopra goes to her.)
CHOPRA: What?
474: 474 die soon.
CHOPRA: No, no, no. Don't, don't say that! You got us through. You can survive this.
(There are Sandmen cowering on the other side of the flames.)
474: Chopra go. Get ship. Chopra be safe. Chopra pretty.
(Chopra takes 474's hand, then she pushes him away. He leaves as the first Sandman braves the flames and walks through them. We get a very good view of them, with vertical maws running down their throats, hands reaching out blindly. 474 picks up her rifle and runs towards them.)
474: Yaaaargh!

[Engine room]

DOCTOR: You said you felt like you were being watched, Clara.
CLARA: Paranoia, you said.
DOCTOR: Not this time.
(He puts his sunglasses on a ledge and projects an image onto the wall.)
DOCTOR: There is a feed. Wireless. These images are being stored by someone. Collated. Nagata, look at this footage. What's wrong with it? What's wrong with it?
NAGATA: Don't know.
DOCTOR: Look, there's one very obvious thing about it. Do you see it yet? No? Okay, I'll tell you what's wrong. There's footage here of everyone. But what's missing in all of it? What can't you see anywhere? Not in the footage, not on this ship. Look. Really look. There are no cameras here. No CCTV. No helmet cams. So, how and why does this footage even exist? The dust has been watching us. Each little organic speck, just a tiny spy drifting through the air. The monsters have been with us all along. That's why the Sandmen are blind. Their visual receptors are being hijacked. But by whom, and why? And then, there's this.
(The projected image is the now, the Doctor pointing over his shoulder at the image, showing him pointing over his shoulder at the image ad infinitum.)
DOCTOR: That's you, Clara. That's you, looking at me.
CLARA: Me?
DOCTOR: You went into the pod. The Morpheus process has begun.
CLARA: Er, well.
DOCTOR: There's nothing here from Chopra's point of view because he refuses to use Morpheus. But everybody else is here. Including you. You don't have a camera, Clara. But you will have by now, sleep in your eye.
CLARA: Okay, well, we'll fix this. You will fix this.
DOCTOR: Yes. I'm sure it'll be fine. I'm sure you'll be fine.
CLARA: Sure?
DOCTOR: We will sort this, Clara. We'll sort you. We'll sort Nagata, and everyone back on Triton. And then we will destroy Morpheus forever.
CLARA: Okay then. Let's get on with it. The power's been almost entirely out since we arrived, but we've still got emergency lighting. But the engines are still on.
DOCTOR: Well, there was that incident with the grav-shields, but. Ah.
CLARA: What, what, what, what, what?
DOCTOR: The grav-shields didn't fail. They were deliberately powered down.
NAGATA: By the Sandmen?
DOCTOR: Well, that's not their style, is it?
(He picks up two disconnected power couplings.)
DOCTOR: It's like, it's like something's been kept here, near the engines, where it's hot. Like something's being kept alive.

[Corridor]

(The Morpheus pod is still gliding along.)
COMPUTER: Warning. Dangerous materials in transit. Human contact not advised. Warning. Dangerous materials in transit. Human contact not advised.

[Engine room]

NAGATA: Well, you said someone's watching, collating images.
DOCTOR: Yeah.
NAGATA: Well, if it's not the Sandmen, then who is it?
DOCTOR: I have an idea who. A very nasty idea.
(He turns off his sunglasses and they leave.)

[Docking tube]

CHOPRA: In the absence of any further communication with Chief Nagata and the others, I must regrettably assume them to be deceased. Under the circumstances, I'm now returning to the ship and will begin preparations to destroy Le Verrier station.
(The bulkhead doors open, a Sandman roars. Chopra readies his rifle and walks forward.)

[Rescue ship]

CHOPRA: Who's there? Chief?!
(There is a closed Morpheus pod in the compartment. He goes forward to the next, where the one that Deep-Ando had been using is still open. The doors close behind him. There is a roar and he screams.)

[Docking tube]

NAGATA: Rescue ship? Why are we going to the rescue ship?
DOCTOR: Because that's where he'll be.

[Rescue ship]

RASSMUSSEN [OC]: Gagan Rassmussen. I'm Gagan Rassmussen. This is Le Verrier lab in orbit around Neptune. I've put things together into some kind of order.
DOCTOR: You had that prepared well in advance, didn't you? Your statement. Your alibi. There would inevitably be questions when you got to Triton. So, you needed to get your story straight.
RASSMUSSEN [OC]: This is what happened.
(A portion of hull slides back by the closed pod.)
RASSMUSSEN: You can't fight them, Doctor. There's no point. They're the future. A new life form. A better life form. That's very clear to me now. They've made me understand. And we're to be their food, and that's only correct. I just needed to find a way to get them off this station, and back to Triton. And then, they'll spread. Spread everywhere.
CLARA: And that's what you want? You're helping them wipe out humanity!
RASSMUSSEN: Things have been made very clear to me!
NAGATA: But we saw you die. The Sandmen swallowed you.
DOCTOR: I think the Professor has been playing a long game. Am I right?
RASSMUSSEN: They speak to me in my mind. Trust me, I think. But they're like children. Babies. So new. Evolving. Hungry. Always so hungry. I made them understand. We had to find a way out. And then there'd be new food sources. Unlimited. So, they spared me. And we waited.
DOCTOR: You and your cargo.
RASSMUSSEN: (nods) I got it in here while you were all distracted.
(He opens another bulkhead door to reveal the closed Morpheus pod that had been gliding through the station.)
CLARA: What's in there? Dust?
DOCTOR: It's like smuggling a jam jar full of germs through customs.
RASSMUSSEN: No. No,  more than that.
DOCTOR: What do you mean?
RASSMUSSEN: I've been working on Morpheus for a very long time, Doctor.  I had to start somewhere. Morpheus's first client. Patient Zero. The ultimate Wide-Awake. Inside there is a man who hasn't slept in five years.
DOCTOR: Or what's left of him.
RASSMUSSEN: He's the well-spring. Once we get to Triton, he will spread his spores.  
CLARA: But you said it was an encoded signal. Something electronic in the Morpheus process that changed the chemical reaction in the brain.
RASSMUSSEN: That's how it started, yes, but it's changing all the time. Evolving new ways to infect, to flourish. Whole moons, whole planets, whole civilisations. They'll spread everywhere.
DOCTOR: You know I can't allow that.
RASSMUSSEN: You can't stop them. None of us can.
(Nagata aims her weapon at Rassmussen.)
NAGATA: I wouldn't bet on that, pet.
(Rassmussen raises his hands, then grabs a lapel. The pod starts to open. A Sandman sits up and roars. Nagata shoots at it.)
CLARA: Doctor! Doctor!
(Rassmussen runs out, closing the bulkhead door. The Doctor, Clara and Nagata stay still and whisper.)
DOCTOR: What he wants is to get that thing off this ship. We have to stop him.
NAGATA: Any ideas?
DOCTOR: The doors are not a problem.
(He puts on his sonic sunglasses.)
NAGATA: But that is.
(Rassmussen is operating controls.)
DOCTOR: We need a distraction.
(He takes the song holo-disc from his pocket.)
DOCTOR: When I say run, run.
(He puts the holo-DVD on a storage container and activates it.)
DOCTOR: Hey! Sandy!
SINGERS:  Bom, bom, bom, bom, bom 
DOCTOR: Run!
(The Sandman is distracted by the holograms.)
SINGERS:  Bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom, bom 
DOCTOR: Doors!
SINGERS:  Mister Sandman, bring me your dreams. 
(The doors open and they run into the compartment where Rassmussen is working the controls. Doors close again.)
DOCTOR: Rassmussen! Turn off the engines. Shut this ship down!
RASSMUSSEN: I can't do that, I'm afraid, Doctor. We can't fight the inevitable. Humanity's day is done.
NAGATA: Yeah? Well, Humanity might have something to say about that, pet.
(Nagata shoots Rassmussen, who falls back into a chair.)
RASSMUSSEN: Argh!
DOCTOR: No!
CLARA: Is that your answer for everything?
NAGATA: Did you have a better one?
DOCTOR: He's not the only one dead. According to this data, we're the only ones left alive on this station.
(The Sandman bangs on the door. We can still hear the Singers too.)
CLARA: Doctor.
NAGATA: Come on, man. We've got to go!
(The Doctor has his glasses on again.)
DOCTOR: This doesn't make any sense.
CLARA: What?
DOCTOR: A man who hasn't slept for five years?
CLARA: Well, you heard what he said. That's the first Morpheus patient.
DOCTOR: But the dust consumes the host.
CLARA: And then they make Sandmen. They conglomerate.
DOCTOR: We escaped from that cold storage room because they were blind.  And why power down the grav-shields when he did?  It's like this is all for effect.
CLARA: Look, can we maybe have this conversation when we get off this thing?
(The Doctor removes his glasses.)
DOCTOR: Like a story.
NAGATA: Come on!

[Docking tube]

NAGATA: How do we get off this crate?
DOCTOR: Alternative transport.
(The Sandman forces the tube doors open and follows them.)

[Storage area]

DOCTOR: We have to get to Triton, destroy all the Morpheus machines. End this. This is how we get home?
CLARA: I've never been so pleased to see
(Sandmen move between them and the Tardis. More approach from behind.)
DOCTOR: Nagata!
(He turns Nagata round and uses her helmet schematic projector on a copper sheet.)
CLARA: Doctor, quickly!
(The Doctor taps the projection of the anti-grav shield generators.)
NAGATA: What did you just do?
DOCTOR: Self-destructed the grav-shields.
NAGATA: What?
(The spacestation tilts. The women cry out.)
DOCTOR: It's working!
(Clara uses her key to open the Tardis door. The Sandmen are stationary, falling to pieces.)
DOCTOR: Neptune's gravity is pulling them apart, bit by bit! It doesn't make sense. None of this makes any sense.
(They run inside the Tardis and it dematerialises.)

(The station is shaking as Rassmussen pops up on our screen. We now know these messages have been compiled in the rescue ship.)
RASSMUSSEN: Hello again! Thing is, you see, this message, this testament, it wasn't just my alibi. It was my plan. There are no spores, no infection. The Morpheus process remains the same. An electronic signal that affects the sleep centres of the brain. Changes them. An electronic signal that's contained in this recording. (static flicker.) There it is. Tickles, doesn't it? I've just got time to fit this bit in and then I can finish the story, and then I'm going to transmit this footage to the whole Solar System. I do hope you've enjoyed the show. I did try to make it exciting. All those scary bits. All those death-defying scrapes, monsters, and a proper climax with a really big one at the end! Compulsive viewing. I did tell you not to watch.
(Rassmussen rubs his eye. Dust falls out, leaving a hole in his head.)
RASSMUSSEN: (deeper slower voice) There's nothing left of Rassmussen any more. Only us. Only us. You will show this film to your family, won't you? And your friends. And everyone, really. Then we can all be together, dust to dust. Excuse me, you've got something there, just in the corner of your eye.
(Rassmussen's head falls to dust as he points to the top left corner of the screen. He laughs as he crumbles to pieces, then the cathode ray screen goes black, with just a small fading dot of light in the centre.)


[Tardis]

(Clara runs through the door, followed by the Doctor, who closes it on the bright yellow light outside.)
CLARA: I told you it'd work!
DOCTOR: It very nearly ate you for dinner.
CLARA: Oh, admit it. I totally saved your life.
DOCTOR: It wasn't going to eat me.
CLARA: (laughs) I totally saved you from having to marry that giant sentient plant thing. That bit when I jumped over the side? That was amazing.
(The Doctor snorts and grins.)
CLARA: Ha! I knew you were impressed.
DOCTOR: The second most beautiful garden in all of time and space, and we can never come back here because you, Miss Oswald, decided
(The Tardis console phone rings. They stare at it, then the Doctor gestures for Clara to answer it.)
CLARA: Hello?
RIGSY [OC]: Clara? Finally. It's Rigsy.
CLARA: Oh. Rigsy. Hey. What's wrong?

[Rigsy's home]

(The lad from Flatline is in front of his bathroom mirror, and worried.)
RIGSY: So I have this, er, it kind of looks like a tattoo.
CLARA [OC]: Seriously? I gave you this number for emergencies.
RIGSY: It's an emergency, trust me. Just

[Tardis]

RIGSY [OC]: Come and take a look at it. Please.
DOCTOR: Who said you could give out my number?
CLARA: Look, look, no matter how bad it is, we cannot take you back down your timeline

[Rigsy's home]

CLARA [OC]: Just to fix a tattoo.
RIGSY: That's just it. I didn't get a tattoo. And it's, it's counting down.

[Tardis]
CLARA: Sorry, what?

[Rigsy's home]

(Rigsy holds a mirror up to the back of his neck to show his tattoo, the numbers 538.)
RIGSY: The tattoo - it's a number and it's counting down to zero.

[Tardis]

CLARA: Hang tight. We'll be right there.

[Rigsy's home]

RIGSY: Hurry. Please.
(The number changes to 537.
After the title sequence we see a bright light flashing in the window of a seventh floor flat, accompanied by the Tardis materialisation sound. She has parked herself in the baby's bedroom. The baby herself is lying in a pink cot, and the Doctor is now wearing a burgundy Crombie jacket and white shirt of the style preferred in the last season, before he went all rock and roll on us. Everyone is whispering despite the child being wide awake.)
DOCTOR: Did you make this human?
RIGSY: Lucy? Yeah, she's mine.
CLARA: Oh. Hello. Oh, Rigsy, she's gorgeous.
DOCTOR: She's better than that. She's brilliant. What are you doing running round getting tattoos when there's
CLARA: Shh!
RIGSY: Look, I didn't get anything. I woke up this morning and it was just there. Jen noticed it.
DOCTOR: Okay, show me this tattoo that you didn't get, then.
(Rigsy turns and pulls down the back of his jumper collar.)
DOCTOR: It's a tattoo. It's very boring.
RIGSY: No, wait. Just, just keep watching.
CLARA: What were you doing last night?
RIGSY: That's just it. Yesterday was a total blank. Jen said that I left the house before dawn, I missed work, and I didn't get back till after midnight. No one saw me all day.
(The Doctor has finished flicking through a baby's picture book when the tattoo changes from 533 to 532.)
DOCTOR: Oh, that's not boring. That is very not boring.
(He puts on his sonic sunglasses.)
CLARA: What? What is it?
(The Doctor removes his glasses.)
DOCTOR: Okay, Local Knowledge, you're coming with us. Bring the new human. No, don't bring the new human. I'll just get distracted.

[Tardis]

(A golden line is moving down Rigsy, doing a full body scan where he stands.)
DOCTOR: If you want your extremities to stay attached, stand absolutely still. If not, we can provide a small bag, you can take them home at the end.
(Clara has Rigsy's smart phone plugged into the console.)
CLARA: Rigsy, your phone. It's like they've wiped it, but only the last day. No location data, no texts, nothing. You're sure the screen wasn't cracked before yesterday?
RIGSY: Mmm hmm.
DOCTOR: Oh. Right, okay, here we go. Ah Good. Weird. Good and weird.
(The scanner says the count is 526.)
RIGSY: (without moving anything) Can I?
DOCTOR: Er, oh, yes, yes. Of course. First off. In the last twenty four hours, you have had significant contact with alien lifeforms, right here in the centre of London.
RIGSY: Okay, so why don't I remember anything?
DOCTOR: You've been retconned.
RIGSY: Huh?
CLARA: What conned?
DOCTOR: Amnesia drug.
(Captain Jack Harkness's favourite drug.)
DOCTOR: Your pre-frontal cortex is marinating in it. Ooo, there's something else. Something. Er, not good. Weird.
(The Doctor walks around the console and picks up his cue cards. The top one reads I Could Be Wrong. Lets Try It Your Way. He goes to the next card. Clara stares at him.)
RIGSY: What's he doing?
CLARA: He's making an effort to be nice.
DOCTOR: There is no nice way to say you're about to die.
RIGSY: What?
(The Doctor puts down his cards and walks the rest of the way round.)
DOCTOR: Rigsy
RIGSY: No, no, no, no, no. Don't start using my actual name now. Call me Pudding Brain, call me Local Knowledge. Whatever. Just don't call me Rigsy. You're going to save me. You're a doctor. That's what you do.
(The Doctor turns away and thinks about it, then turns back.)
DOCTOR: Okay. Okay. Yes, okay, let's do this thing. First up, stop the countdown. Five hundred and twenty six minutes. Right. Okay. Yes, you know what, Local Knowledge, I don't know who did this to you or why. But I do almost certainly know how to find them.

[Outside the British Library]

(The Tardis materialises down a side street. The Doctor, Clara and Rigsy get out.)
DOCTOR: There have always been rumours, stories passed from traveller to traveller. Mutterings about hidden streets.

[British Library]

DOCTOR: Secret pockets of alien life right here on Earth. Like a smuggler's cove, only not a cove, because it's right here, right in the middle of the capital.
RIGSY: The hidden places are in the Great British Library?
DOCTOR: No. The maps are.

[BN31 Map Room]

(No documents to be taken from this room. The Doctor and Rigsy are unrolling lots of old maps of central London. One is projected onto a screen on the wall behind them.)
DOCTOR: I never put stock in it. London streets that suddenly disappeared from human view? No. You lot are always overlooking things, but whole streets? That would be excessive, even for you. If the stories are true, though, there should be a street on one of these old maps that no longer exists in the real world.
CLARA: Like a trap street, only not.
DOCTOR: What did you say?
CLARA: A trap street. You know, when someone's making a map, a, er cartographer, uses a fake street, throws it into the mix, names it after one of his kids or whatever. Then if the fake street, the trap street, ever shows up on someone else's map, they know their work's been stolen. Clever, right?
DOCTOR: My God. A whole London street just up and disappeared and you lot assume it's a copyright infringement.
RIGSY: So we're looking for a trap street?
DOCTOR: We're looking for a trap street and we're not going to find it here.

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: The glasses are tracking your eye movements. Just keep looking straight down and
(Clara is lying down looking out of the open Tardis doorway, wearing the sonic sunglasses.)
CLARA: I know! Focus on the buildings directly below me.
(They are flying along the Thames, from the City to Westminster.)
DOCTOR: Whatever they're using, it only hides the street itself. It prevents you from noticing there's even something missing. They're somehow making our eyes skate right over it. Let's call it a misdirection circuit.
(The Tardis jolts, and Clara slides half way out of the door, with her knee and foot latching onto the other door and the door frame to stop her from falling all the way out.)
RIGSY: Clara!
CLARA: (whoops and laughs) Hello, London!
(Another jolt slides her back in.)
CLARA: (laughing) I'm good. I'm good.
RIGSY: She enjoyed that way too much.
DOCTOR: Tell me about it. It's an ongoing problem. Here.
(He puts Rigsy's hands on the controls.)
DOCTOR: Keep it steady. Just move it slowly over the grid. When we're done, we'll have a map of the areas of the grid that Clara couldn't focus on.

[Pedestrian area]

(Played by Hayes Island, Cardiff. The statue of anti-slavery campaigner John Batchelor is a bit of a giveaway. Our heroes are looking at a map of London with three areas marked in red.)
CLARA: So, these are the bits my eyes skated over.
DOCTOR: Okay, we split up. Clara, that way. (she walks off) Local Knowledge. (another direction)  Forget the way you usually look at the world. This street's going to be hiding in plain sight.

[Various streets]

(As Clara, Rigsy and the Doctor are walking past shops and offices in different locations, but mostly Wharton Street, Cardiff.)
DOCTOR [OC]: If you see something unusual or notable, dismiss it. Just keep walking. But if there's a bit of London so unremarkable that you don't even think about it stop. You could very well be standing right outside a trap street. Count everything that you see.
CLARA: Four, five, six
DOCTOR [OC]: Because when you hit the area around a trap street, it's very likely you'll lose count.
DOCTOR: Seventy nine, eighty, eighty one, eighty two.
(The Doctor stops a boy and his mother who are walking along the street, then kneels down to tie the lad's shoelaces up.)
BOY: Huh?
DOCTOR: Remember. Eighty two.
MOTHER: Come along!
BOY: Eighty two.
DOCTOR [OC]: You'll lose count because the misdirection circuit is creating confusion in your mind. Details won't add up. Reality will have glitches in it.
(Clara stops, shakes her head, and walks backwards in front of the Brew Dog Bar in Westgate Street, Cardiff.)
DOCTOR [OC]: Like when you try to read the same simple sentence three times over
CLARA: One, two, three.
DOCTOR [OC]: And the meaning just won't sink in.
CLARA: Gotcha.

[Park Street corner]

(Clara is already waiting here as the Doctor approaches. According to a road sign seen later, they are probably supposed to be on the eastern section of the London Inner Ringroad, with its directions for the A1, A40, A41, City, West End, Holborn, Marble Arch, and straight on for Aldgate and Shoreditch High Street. Congestion Zone charge area.)
DOCTOR: Clara! Clara! Clara!
(Rigsy arrives from the other direction.)
CLARA: It's off this street, I am certain.
DOCTOR: We're very close. We need to distract our other senses. Clara, go back to the Tardis. Pick up all my most annoying stuff.
(As she comes up the steps of the Tardis with a large clear plastic box containing various brass musical instruments, Rigsy's phone - which is still plugged into the console - beeps. Data Recovered. She puts down the box and takes the phone instead back to Westgate Street.)
DOCTOR: What happened to the stuff I asked you to bring?
CLARA: Someone called you. Yesterday, 6am. Blocked number.
(As soon as Rigsy touches the phone, he drops it. He gets a vision of a girl lying on the pavement, and his phone falling. Then a big alien man in a fur coat runs up and sniffs her while an alien with a tall bone crest on his head crouches nearby.)
RUMP [memory]: She's dead.
DOCTOR: What is it? What are you remembering?
(Rigsy stumbles.)
CLARA: Rigsy, what is it?
RIGSY: You can't see it? There!
(What was previously the join between two buildings is now a tiny alley into a cobbled courtyard.)
CLARA: I see it. You?
DOCTOR: Fifty minutes left. Hoodie up, Local Knowledge. They know what you look like in there.

[Trap Street entrance]

(The Doctor leads the way into the hidden street, which starts with a courtyard area, then meanders in loops around and around. The architecture is Elizabethan, Georgian, Victorian, with occasional traders stalls against walls, and small alleyways or recesses between buildings. The whole place is permanently illuminated by street lamps.)
RIGSY: How come I saw it when you guys couldn't?
DOCTOR: You were upset, weren't you? Something slipped through the retconned memory. Something that took over your whole mind. Something juicy. So the misdirection circuit lost its power over you.
CLARA: Surely people wander in here all the time, then, distracted, on their phones or whatever?
DOCTOR: Well, perhaps they do
(Light zigzags through the cobbles and sticks their feet to the ground. An alarm rings two men come out of hiding. As Rigsy looks at the tall man, he flickers to reveal he is the humanoid alien Rigsy saw yesterday. The crested alien, Kabel, flickers in and out of human form too, which is that of a shorter, dark, bespectacled man. His species is Lugal-Irra-Kush, as seen in Rings of Akhaten.)
RUMP: Three at once.
KABEL: That's new.
RUMP: Hang about. (sniffs the Doctor.) This one don't smell human.
KABEL: Name, species and case for asylum. Quick as you like.
DOCTOR: Asylum?
KABEL: The reason you're here. The reason you need sanctuary.
(He grabs Rump's arm.)
KABEL: Why didn't they use the protocol?
RIGSY: (to the Doctor) I saw through the circuit again. I saw them. They're definitely not human.
RUMP: You do know this is a refugee camp?
DOCTOR: Yeah, of course.
(A familiar woman enters, hair up in large curls 1940s style, and escorted by two police officers.)
ASHILDR: Of course he does, now that you've told him.
(Rump and Kabel bow.)
RUMP: Mayor Me.
CLARA: Ashildr.
ASHILDR: Ashildr?
DOCTOR: That's your name. I keep telling you that.
ASHILDR: Do you? Infinite lifespan, finite memory. It makes for an awkward social life. You must be Clara Oswald. You're as beautiful as your photos.
CLARA: We met.
ASHILDR: Yes, I know. It's in my diaries. Oh, don't look like that. I enjoyed our conversations. I've read them many times.
CLARA: Okay, that's slightly odd, but nice. Er, hang on, so this is where you've been. That's why he lost track of you.
(The Doctor gives Clara a Look.)
CLARA: Oh, come on, please. It's really cute he thinks I don't know. He's got this whole secret room in the Tardis where he collects mentions of you.
ASHILDR: It's not cute. It's surveillance.
DOCTOR: It's professional interest.
ASHILDR: Precautionary measure.
DOCTOR: Still saving the world from me, then?
ASHILDR: It's still here, isn't it?
CLARA: He lost track of you in the early 1800s. I wondered if you were
ASHILDR: Oh, no. I let him know I was okay.
(Remember the photo of Clara and Evie Hubbard in The Woman Who Lived?)
DOCTOR: I saw you.
ASHLIDR: No, I got your attention.
DOCTOR: Yes, you did, and you have. Now we need your help. Someone in this place is in control of a Quantum Shade.
(The Doctor gestures to Rigsy, who lowers his hood and takes off his baseball cap. Rump snarls.)
RUMP: I knew I recognised that smell.
ASHILDR: Oh.
(Ashildr turns her back on them.)
CLARA: Ashildr? What's going on?
(Ashildr removes her scarf and turns around. She is wearing a large interesting pendant and has curly tattoos on her neck.)
DOCTOR: You.
ASHILDR: How do you know this man?
CLARA: Hang on. You did this to Rigsy?
DOCTOR: What have you done?
ASHILDR: This man committed a crime. I sentenced him.
CLARA: Sentenced him?
ASHILDR: I also gave him enough time to return home and say goodbye to his family.
DOCTOR: You flooded his brain with retcon! Till we showed up, he didn't even know that he had to say goodbye.
ASHILDR: I'm afraid no intruder leaves this place without a memory wipe. With respect, that will include you.
CLARA: Oh, the hell it will.
DOCTOR: Ashildr, given we're all going to forget this conversation anyway, perhaps you could tell us what happened here yesterday to necessitate a death sentence?
ASHILDR: Fine, I'll show you. Mister Kabel, Mister Rump. Permit them entry.
DOCTOR: No. You've already endangered one of my friends. I want your personal guarantee that you will not endanger another.
CLARA: Shut up, I can handle myself.
ASHILDR: I guarantee the safety of Clara Oswald. She will be under my personal protection. That is absolute.
KABEL: If that's your wish, Mayor Me.
(Kabel steps on a cobble and the light flashes to release their feet.)
ASHILDR: This way.
RUMP: Murderer.
CLARA: What did you say?
(A flicker shows Rigsy and us that the policemen are Judoon.)

[Trap Street]

RIGSY: Murderer. He called me a murderer.
(Further on, in an area of overhanging buildings, the whole idealised Tudor shtick, people are shopping at small stalls by lamplight.)
DOCTOR: So you're still calling yourself Me, then?
ASHILDR: Me?
DOCTOR: Mayor Me.
ASHILDR: Mayor is a title. I give myself a title for the same reason you do, Doctor. Something to live up to.
(A woman pulls her child aside as Rigsy passes them.)
DOCTOR: Difficult, isn't it?
WOMAN: You stay away from her.
DOCTOR: How long have you been here?
ASHILDR: Since Waterloo.
DOCTOR: The battle?
ASHILDR: No, the station. Really, Doctor. Tread carefully while you're here. Some of your greatest enemies are within a few feet of you. As far as you're concerned, this is the most dangerous street in London.
CLARA: Fascinating. Now, can we skip to the part where you want Rigsy dead for some reason?
WOMAN [OC]: It's him! He's back!
(A bulky man stands up from a table in the street. Flicker - a Sontaran.)
ASHILDR: It's best we get him inside first.
SONTARAN: Murderer. You're not welcome here.
RIGSY: They look at me as if they want to kill me themselves.
MAN [OC]: Don't want your kind round here.
SILURIAN: Murderer!
WOMAN [OC]: Murderer.
(Ashildr gestures to the people to calm down.)
ASHILDR: Like I said, it's best we get inside.
WOMAN [OC]: (alien words.) Keep away from us.
WOMAN 2 [OC]: Filthy murderer!
(An oriental woman's face flickers to a blue alien. Round the corner, Rigsy spots a young man with another face on the back of his head.)
RIGSY: Wait, Clara. Look.
(The young man turns and leaves. Clara pauses by a cage containing a raven. It'd better not turn out to be called Quoth.)
DOCTOR: This misdirection circuit of yours is remarkable. The cloaking device that hides the street, makes everyone look like humans.
ASHILDR: It's no device. It's the Lurkworms. Quite something, aren't they?
(She nods towards the street lamps, which contain glowing worms instead of bulbs.)
ASHILDR: The light is a telepathic field. It normalises everything you see, places it within the compass of your expectations, your experiences. You can bypass them, of course.
(She nods towards a man having his head bandaged by a woman, then pinches his arm, hard.)
DOCTOR: Aiee ah!
(Now the injured man is a Cyberman, being tended by an Ood.)
ASHILDR: Don't worry, we're perfectly safe.
DOCTOR: Yes, a phrase I find is usually followed by a lot of screaming and running and bleeding.
ASHILDR: I brokered a truce. We have strict rules against violence here. Rules every creature must abide by if they wish to remain on the street.
MAN [OC: Get away from us!
MAN 2 [OC]: Don't want your kind round here.
ASHILDR: What's better, that they're in here with me, peaceful and cooperative, or out there on Earth like the Zygons? We haven't had an act of violence on this street for a hundred years, until yesterday, when your friend here attacked one of our most vulnerable residents.
CLARA: How did Rigsy even get in? I mean, we barely managed it,

[Elizabethan House]

(Leaded windows to the street, wooden door fastened with a latch, high-tech container with green lasers holding the recently deceased upright. Lovely ornate staircase behind. Played by somewhere in the Cathays Park University Campus.)
CLARA: And we knew what we were looking for.
ASHILDR: She was found at the entrance of the street.
(Rigsy remembers her.)
ASHILDR: No weapon on the scene, but the cause of death is likely the head wound. Seems she was knocked to the cobblestones.
CLARA: Seems? You've sentenced Rigsy to death yet you don't know exactly what's going on?
ASHILDR: He was found over the body. My people were angry, frightened. I had to act.
CLARA: This is ridiculous, this is
RIGSY: What was her name?
ASHILDR: Anah. We're keeping her here until someone can take her home for burial.
DOCTOR: She's a Janus.
ASHILDR: She escaped slavery. She fled here with her child.
DOCTOR: The child. A daughter?
ASHILDR: No, a boy.
CLARA: Is that bad?
DOCTOR: No, it's not bad, it's just unhelpful. A daughter might've seen who killed her mother.
(The Doctor nods to the back of Anah's head. Clara steps forward to see a second face there. )
DOCTOR: The female Janus is psychic. One face sees into the future, the other looks behind her, into the past.
CLARA: I think we saw her son outside.
RIGSY: Clara, what if I did do it? I mean, I wouldn't have meant to hurt her, but, what if I wandered in and saw what she really looked like? What if I freaked?
DOCTOR: You didn't just wander in here. You were called here at 6am by a number from a mystery phone.
CLARA: There is no way you did this.
ASHILDR: So, what then? You think someone called him here? Set him up?
CLARA: Yes!
OLD MAN [OC]: Mayor!
CLARA: Obviously. Which means one of your pet aliens out there is the real killer.
(Banging on door.)
OLD MAN [OC]: I just need to talk to her.
ASHILDR: Excuse me. I'm sorry.
DOCTOR: Yes. Please, go. It's not like we've got a ticking clock or anything.
OLD MAN [OC]: Mayor, I beg of you, please
(The Doctor checks the back of Rigsy's neck.)
DOCTOR: Forty one minutes.

[Trap Street]

(A crowd stands at a discreet distance while an old man and woman talk to Ashildr. In the credits, he is Chronolock Man, but that doesn't sound descriptive enough to me.)
OLD MAN: Lock me up, throw us out, anything but this. Please. I only took it to save her.
ASHILDR: How many minutes left?
(Rump checks the back of the man's neck.
RUMP: Two, Madam Mayor.
(Ashildr addresses the crowd. The Doctor, Clara and Rigsy have come outside too.)
ASHILDR: This man stole medical rations. He broke a rule of the street and he stole from all of you. And yes, I can remove the chronolock. But I won't. Our rules keep us safe.
OLD WOMAN: Give it to me. Please. Tell me I can have it. One word. Say it. Say yes.
OLD MAN: I did this to save you, you silly old thing. You really think I could lose you now?
(Ashildr breaths in and closes her eyes. The tattoo on her neck becomes smoke and leaves her.)
RIGSY: What's happening?
DOCTOR: It's called a Quantum Shade. It's kind of a spirit. Once it's bound to a victim
(The Raven turns to smoke and leaves its cage.)
DOCTOR: You could flee across all of time and all of the universe, it would still find you.
(The old man and woman embrace, then the Raven lands on an awning above a stall and caws. The old man is frightened.)
KABEL: Don't run. Stay with her.
(The old man runs into a house.)
OLD WOMAN: Don't go!
KABEL: Why do they always run?
(The Raven flies through the closed door. The old man runs out of another.)
OLD MAN [OC]: Help me, somebody, please!
DOCTOR: At least give him a merciful death.
OLD MAN [OC]: Oh, no! Oh, no!
ASHILDR: Do you think a Cyberman fears a merciful death?
OLD MAN [OC]: Help me! Help me, please! Please, please, anybody.
ASHILDR: Peace on this street depends on one thing. To break it in any way is to face the Raven.
OLD MAN [OC]: No! No! Please help me!
(The old man runs through the street maze until the tattoo on his neck changes to zero, then the Raven flies into his back. The old man arches his back and screams, then falls to his knees as smoke billows out of his mouth. Kabel goes to comfort the old woman as the man falls sideways, dead. The Raven flies away and the Quantum Shade tattoo returns to Ashildr's neck.)
ASHILDR: I have no wish to harm your friend if he is innocent, Doctor. Question anyone. Examine the body. But it's not me you need to convince of Rigsy's innocence. It's them.
(Ashildr leaves with her police escort. The Doctor looks at a watch then rubs the back of his neck. Rigsy makes a phone call in the background.)
CLARA: Okay, we split up. Cover more ground. I'm good cop, you're bad cop.
DOCTOR: No, no, no, we don't have. Can I not be the good cop?
CLARA: Doctor, we've discussed this. Your face.
DOCTOR: Oh, yes. Well, forget about cops, right? Forget about finding the real killer. You heard Ashildr. All we have to do is persuade these creatures that it isn't Rigsy. And fast.
(A baby cries somewhere.)
RIGSY: Shush. Shush, baby girl.
JEN [OC]: She's been like this all day.
RIGSY: Listen, you be good for your mum for me, okay? And I'm doing my best to get home to you guys.
JEN [OC]: She won't stop crying.
RIGSY: Yeah, I know. Yeah, she can probably tell you're upset.
CLARA: Rump? It's er Rump, isn't it? That man's wife. She said something. Give it to me, tell me I can have it. What did she mean?
RUMP: Two ways to survive a Quantum Shade. The Shade's master removes the chronolock, or you can give it to someone else.
CLARA: Give it? You can just
RUMP: No, you can't just push it on someone. It's not that simple. It has to be taken willingly. The death's already locked in. You can pass it on, but you can't cheat it.
(Rump leaves. Clara turns and sees the Janus boy. She waves, and he leaves.)
(In a quiet corner, where there are various posters on the wall including one of a flux capacitor, and what I am assured is the word Delorian in Star Wars script.)
RIGSY: You're serious? You actually expect me to give you my death sentence?
CLARA: Ssh! Go on. I've always wanted a tattoo. You know, something small, discreet.
RIGSY: Clara. Cut it out.
CLARA: Weren't you listening? I'm under the Mayor's personal protection. And it's absolute, apparently. Look, she controls the Raven, so I will never have to face it. This is clever.
RIGSY: But this is putting you in danger.
CLARA: No, this is us talking the opposition into their own trap. This is Doctor 101. We're buying time. We get all of the aliens on our side in the next half an hour, and then we reveal I've got the chronolock, not you, and boom! We buy ourselves more time to find the real killer.
RIGSY: The Doctor would never let you do this.
CLARA: Doctor 102. Never tell anyone your actual plan. He'll have a tantrum when he finds out. And then, when we confront Ashildr, she'll want to take the chronolock off just to shut him up. What happens if you don't go home tonight to Jen and Lucy, eh? If you never go home? You really want your little girl growing up without a father just because he wouldn't take a risk? You trusted us to save you, so trust us. Come on.
RIGSY: Okay. All right. Right, how do we do this, then?
CLARA: Well, I was kind of hoping that would be it. I say I want it, you say, you can have it. You know, done deal. Hey, turn around, let me see.
(Rigsy's tattoo says 033. Clara touches it and it turns to smoke, then moves to the back of her neck. The Raven caws in its cage. Rigsy looks at Clara's new tattoo.)
RIGSY: So this is your life, then? Just bouncing around time, saving people, right?
CLARA: No, not every day. Sometimes Jane Austen and I prank each other. Oh, she is the worst. I love her. Take that how you like.
(Clara walks off.)
(Meanwhile, Rump is drinking from a pewter tankard outside what is presumably an ale house.)
DOCTOR: Are you sure it wasn't someone from the street?
RUMP: I've told you already there wasn't anyone up that end of the street except Anah and the human.
DOCTOR: I've identified twenty seven different species on this street so far, fifteen of whom are known for aggression. Why is it so hard to believe that one of them is capable of murder?
RUMP: Capable of murder, yeah. Capable of killing Anah? No.
DOCTOR: Why not? What's so special about her?
(Clara is interviewing women in the street.)
HABRIAN WOMAN: It was the way she looked at you, like she understood.
GREY-HAIRED WOMAN: One glance into your past and she felt it all. Every battle, every loss.
DOCTOR: So you just want the human dead, is that it?
RUMP: You don't get it, do you? If the human didn't do it, that means one of us did it, which means folks start pointing fingers, turning on each other. And once we turn on each other in here, that's it. I might as well be back in a war zone.
DOCTOR: So you'll just let Rigsy die?
RUMP: To keep the peace? Yeah, I will.
(By a drinks stall.)
KABEL: Your friend, acting like he was all scared of us, calling for a doctor.
DOCTOR: A what?
KABEL: I know. The cheek of it. Humans can survive losing entire limbs and I'm supposed to believe he
DOCTOR: Shut up! Shut up. The other thing you said, the second thing. What, what, what, you said he was scared and?
KABEL: And he asked the Mayor to call him a doctor. Poor Anah, dead at his feet, and
DOCTOR: Shh. Did he say a doctor or the doctor? This is very, very important.
KABEL: The doctor. There was nothing wrong with him, mind. It was all just your standard human lies.
(The Doctor runs off to a meeting with Clara and Rigsy by a vegetable stall.)
DOCTOR: Clara gave you my number for emergencies. So when you wake up with a weird tattoo on your neck and no memory of the last twenty four hours, the first thing you do is call the Doctor.
RIGSY: Call the Doctor?
DOCTOR: But you find yourself accused of murder on a strange alien street in the middle of London. Only they've taken your phone, so you beg the woman in charge to call me instead. She knew you and I were friends. So why'd she lie? Unless she had something to hide.
WOMAN [OC]: Murderer!
DOCTOR: There's something very wrong here and we're running out of time.
CLARA: Ahem. There's twelve minutes left. I'm not giving up yet.
RIGSY: Look, Clara, even if one of them knows something, they're not going to come forward. The way they look at me.
CLARA: The way they look at you?
RIGSY: What?

[Outside Anah's home]

(Clara knocks at the door of the Janus boy. He opens it then starts to closes it again.)
CLARA: Hey, wait. Everyone here is weird around us because of Rigsy. But not you. You look at me and the Doctor like you're confused. Like you're curious.
ANAHSON: I don't know what you mean.
CLARA: You do. You know Rigsy is innocent because you can look into his past and you can see it, can't you?

[Anah's home]

(Clara and Anahson are sitting on the settee.)
CLARA: She dressed you as a boy to protect you, but really you're a girl. You have the gift.
ANAHSON: It is no gift. I'm safe as a boy. This is the first place I've ever been safe, and you want me to throw it away? To admit what I am?
DOCTOR: The Mayor. What is she up to? It's nothing good, is it?
ANAHSON: I can't see everything, but she thinks she's doing the right thing.
DOCTOR: They usually do. If what Ashildr is doing is harmless, then we'll just walk out of that door. No one will know of your abilities. But if it's not
ANAHSON: I don't know what she means to do. No, I'm trying, but I can't see it. I can't see it because it involves you. When I look at you, I can't tell your past from your future, and there's so very much of both.
(The Doctor walks around to the back of the settee.)
DOCTOR: This isn't about Rigsy. It's about me.
(Anahson closes her eyes, and the face on the back of her head opens its eyes and speaks with a slightly distorted voice.)
ANAHSON 2: She couldn't just ask you here. She needed a mystery. You can never resist a mystery. She's afraid.
DOCTOR: Afraid of what? Of whom?
ANAHSON 2: I can't see.
(The second face closes its eyes, and the first one opens heirs.)
ANAHSON: I'm sorry.

[Trap Street]

(They run past the Raven's cage, and it caws.)
DOCTOR: You hold your tongue. We've got ten minutes left!

[Elizabethan House]

DOCTOR: Ashildr said Anah was being taken home for burial. But the Janus burn their dead.
RIGSY: Is that true?
(Anahson nods.)
CLARA: So, look, Ashildr got it wrong. What does it matter? Come on!
DOCTOR: There's something about this tech
RIGSY: Look, Doctor, we don't have time,
ANAHSON: What is it?
(The Doctor activates a screen on a slot machine style er, machine.)
DOCTOR: It looks like medical data.
ANAHSON: But it can't be. She's dead. She isn't breathing.
DOCTOR: This thing's a stasis pod. If you're dead, it's a kind of fancy refrigerator. But if you're alive
(He turns on the speakers, and a heartbeat sounds.)
DOCTOR: It simply keeps you that way.
ANAHSON: She's alive?
DOCTOR: She's alive.
ANAHSON: Well, get her out! Get her out of there!
DOCTOR: There must be a way to unlock it. Something basic, something simple that I'm missing.
(Randomly pressing symbols on the screen, beep, beep.)
RIGSY: A keyhole!
DOCTOR: A keyhole would be very handy, yes, but I haven't got one.
RIGSY: No, no, no, a keyhole! Look!
(In the side of the base of the machine.)
ANAHSON: I'll find her. I'll get the key.
DOCTOR: No, Anahson, stay here. There's a reason that the Mayor has gone AWOL. She means for us to release your mother, but she doesn't want us to use her key. She wants to use mine.
(The Doctor holds up a Yale key.)
CLARA: The Tardis. That's what this is about.
(He goes to unlock the stasis chamber base.)
CLARA: Doctor, wait!
DOCTOR: This girl needs her mother. Ah!
(Clunk!)
CLARA: Doctor!
DOCTOR: I can't
CLARA: What's it doing?
(The Doctor pulls his right arm out with his left, the panel slides shut, the green lasers disappear, and Anah breaths. The Doctor has a steel bracelet firmly clamped on his right forearm. Rigsy and Anahson catch Anah before she falls.)
ANAHSON: Mum! Mum, are you okay?
ASHILDR: She'll be perfectly fine in a few moments. I assure you.
DOCTOR: There are easier ways to steal a key, you know.
ASHILDR: I don't want your Tardis. That's not what this is about. Rigsy, come here, I'll remove your chronolock.
DOCTOR: What is this, Ashildr? You can't possibly think this is going to keep me here.
ASHILDR: It's not a restraint. It's a teleport bracelet.
(Shouldn't that be transmat, given that this is Dr Who?)
CLARA: What?
ASHILDR: I'll give you time to say goodbye, don't worry. No one will be hurt.
DOCTOR: Where are you sending me?
ASHILDR: I made a deal to protect the street. They take you, I take the key so you can't be traced. I do as they tell me, and the street is safe.
DOCTOR: They? Who are they?
ASHILDR: One more thing. Your confession dial. They have other means of procuring it, but I understand it's likely to be on your person. Please, no resistance. You've already lost.
(The Doctor hands over the engraved disc.)
ASHILDR: What is it?
DOCTOR: In your terms, my last will and testament.
ASHILDR: How does it work?
DOCTOR: I've no idea.
ASHILDR: Well, thank you anyway.
(Ashildr puts the confession dial on a mantelpiece.)
ASHILDR: Rigsy, your neck.
RIGSY: Clara, what are you playing at? The chronolock!
CLARA: Take the teleport off him first.
(Ashildr reaches for Rigsy's neck.)
RIGSY: I don't have it, I'm telling you. Clara does.
(Clara shows Ashildr the back of her neck.)
ASHILDR: No. No, you didn't.
(008.)
CLARA: Go on, then. Take it off.
DOCTOR: Clara, you didn't!
(The Doctor turns Clara around and stares at the numbers in horror.)
ASHILDR: I had no idea she'd do something so stupid. I swear, I never meant for anyone to get hurt. Look, what were you thinking? Sacrificing yourself?
CLARA: I wasn't sacrificing anything. It was strategy. Backup plan, to buy us more time.
DOCTOR: Who told you to give it to her?
CLARA: Nobody did. I did. Rump said
DOCTOR: What exactly did Rump say?
CLARA: He said the death is locked in. You can pass it on, but you
(Clara realises her folly.)
DOCTOR: But what?
CLARA: But
ASHILDR: But you can't cheat it altogether.
(The Raven caws in its cage.)
RIGSY: Clara, you didn't tell me that. Give it back to me, now.
ASHILDR: She can't. Clara, I made a contract with the Shade when I put the chronolock on Rigsy. I promised it a soul and only I can break that contract. When you took it from him, you changed the terms. You cut me out of the deal.
(The Quantum Shade Raven leaves its cage.)
CLARA: We can fix this, can't we? We always fix it.
DOCTOR: No. (to Ashildr) But you can. Fix this. Fix it now.
ASHILDR: It, it's not possible. I can't.
DOCTOR: Yes, it is, you can, and you will, or this street will be over. I'll show you and all your funny little friends to the whole laughing world. I'll bring UNIT, I'll bring the Zygons. Give me a minute, I'll bring the Daleks and the Cybermen. You will save Clara, and you will do it now, or I will rain hell on you for the rest of time.
CLARA: Doctor, stop talking like that.
ASHILDR: You can't.
DOCTOR: I can do whatever the hell I like. You've read the stories. You know who I am. And in all of that time, did you ever hear anything about anyone who stopped me?
ASHILDR: I know the Doctor. The Doctor would never
DOCTOR: The Doctor is no longer here! You are stuck with me. And I will end you, and everything you love.
CLARA: Doctor, for God's sake, will you stop?
DOCTOR: Now!
CLARA: I did this, do you hear me? I did this. This is my fault.
DOCTOR: I don't care.
CLARA: Liar. You always care. Always have. Your reign of terror will end with the sight of the first crying child and you know it.
DOCTOR: No, I don't.
CLARA: I do. Listen, if this is the last I ever see of you, please, not like this.
(The Raven caws in the distance.)
CLARA: (to Ashildr) Is there anything you can do?
ASHILDR: I'm sorry. I'm truly sorry, I
CLARA: Time's short. Yes or no?
ASHILDR: No.
(The Doctor breathes heavily. Rigsy is trying not to cry.)
CLARA: Well, if Danny Pink can do it, so can I.
DOCTOR: Do what?
CLARA: Die right. Die like I mean it. Face the Raven.
DOCTOR: No. This, this isn't happening. This can't be happening.
CLARA: Maybe this is what I wanted. Maybe this is it. Maybe this is why I kept running. Maybe this is why I kept taking all those stupid risks. Kept pushing it.
DOCTOR: This is my fault.
CLARA: This is my choice.
DOCTOR: I let you get reckless.
CLARA: Why? Why shouldn't I be so reckless? You're reckless all the bloody time. Why can't I be like you?
DOCTOR: Clara, there's nothing special about me. I am nothing, but I'm less breakable than you. I should have taken care of you.
CLARA: I never asked you to.
DOCTOR: You shouldn't have to ask.
(The Raven caws as it flies along the winding street, and the people scatter, terrified.)
RIGSY: Clara, if I'd known, I'd
CLARA: Don't. Shut up.
RIGSY: But I
CLARA: Really, Rigsy, shut up. If you feel guilty about this, even for one minute, I
(They hear the Raven.)
CLARA: You. Now, you listen to me. You're going to be alone now, and you're very bad at that. You're going to be furious and you're going to be sad, but listen to me. Don't let this change you. No, listen. Whatever happens next, wherever she is sending you, I know what you're capable of. You don't be a Warrior. Promise me. Be a Doctor.
DOCTOR: What's the point of being a Doctor if I can't cure you?
CLARA: Heal yourself. You have to. You can't let this turn you into a monster. So, I'm not asking you for a promise, I'm giving you an order. You will not insult my memory. There will be no revenge. I will die, and no one else, here or anywhere, will suffer.
DOCTOR: What about me?
CLARA: If there was something I could do about that, I would. I guess we're both just going to have to be brave.
DOCTOR: Clara.
(They hug.)
CLARA: Everything you are about to say, I already know. Don't do it now. We've already had enough bad timing.
(The Raven caws close by.)
DOCTOR: Don't run. Stay with me.
CLARA: Nah. You stay here. In the end, everybody does this alone.
DOCTOR: Clara
CLARA: This is as brave as I know how to be. I know it's going to hurt you, but, please, be a little proud of me.
(She touches his cheek. He takes her hand and kisses it.)
CLARA: Goodbye, Doctor.
(The Raven caws.)

[Trap Street]

(Clara steps out into the deserted street. The Raven lands on a nearby stall and caws. She walks towards it as other passers-by run away. The Doctor steps out of the doorway.)
CLARA: (sotto) Let me be brave. Let me be brave.
(The Raven launches itself from its perch. Clara opens her arms wide and it flies into her stomach. She opens her mouth wide in a silent scream - or at least one completely drowned out by the music - then relaxes and the Quantum Shade smoke comes out of her mouth as she falls to the ground.)

[Elizabethan House]

(Eventually the Doctor enters and shuts the door.)
ASHILDR: I'm sorry, Doctor. I truly am.
(Ashildr steps up to the stasis chamber control panel and makes it beep, then steps away again.)
DOCTOR: What Clara said about not taking revenge. Do you know why she said that?
ASHILDR: She was saving you.
DOCTOR: I was lost a long time ago. She was saving you. I'll do my best, but I strongly advise you to keep out of my way. You'll find that it's a very small universe when I'm angry with you.
(Ashildr nods. The teleport bracelet beeps, then the Doctor is gently beamed away in purple and white light while Ashildr turns her back. The bracelet drops to the floor with a clang.)


DOCTOR [OC]: As you come into this world, something else is also born.
(Large cogwheels turn. We journey around a large stone building with leaded windows, narrow corridors, spiral staircases up tall towers, grills covering sets of large cogwheels set into the stonework, and every few yards screens hang on the walls, full of static.)
DOCTOR [OC]: You begin your life, and it begins a journey towards you. It moves slowly, but it never stops. Wherever you go, whatever path you take, it will follow. Never faster, never slower, always coming. You will run. It will walk. You will rest. It will not. One day, you will linger in the same place too long. You will sit too still or sleep too deep, and when, too late, you rise to go, you will notice a second shadow next to yours. Your life will then be over.

[Teleport chamber room]

(In a large room containing a teleport (note- not a transmat) chamber and its separate control console, a blackened hand reaches for a lever, squeezes the grip to release it, and pulls. The owner of the hand gasps and falls, cogs turn, and the hand turns to dust. Light fills the teleport chamber and the Doctor appears, coughing and gasping. The machinery slows and stops. He opens the curved perspex door of the teleport chamber and steps out, closing it behind him. He remembers the moment the Quantum Shade raven entered Clara's body, then scoops a handful of sand from the floor and lets it trickle though his fingers.)
DOCTOR: If you think because she is dead, I am weak, then you understand very little. If you were any part of killing her, and you're not afraid, then you understand nothing at all. So, for your own sake, understand this. I am the Doctor. I'm coming to find you, and I will never, ever stop.

[Tower]

(The Doctor cautiously leaves the room and goes anticlockwise along a curved corridor with deep square openings cut in the outer wall to admit light. He leans out of one to see the shadows of spokes cast on the ground far below. Then he looks up at the outside of a tall tower.)
DOCTOR: The equipment in that room is consistent with an augmented ultra long-range teleport. So, I'm not more than a single light year from where I was, and I'm in the same time zone.
(He looks up out of another opening at the sky then across a courtyard at more towers. Then he starts to walk back clockwise.)
DOCTOR: When the sun sets, I'll be able to establish an exact position by the stars. Then you'll have a choice. Come out, show yourself, or keep on hiding. Clara said I shouldn't take revenge. You should know, I don't always listen.
(He finds a spade with soil on it leaning against the inner wall.)
DOCTOR: Oh, what's this? Well, are you gardeners? I hate gardening! What sort of a person has a power complex about flowers? It's dictatorship for inadequates. Or to put it another way, it's dictatorship. Come on! Chop, chop! The Doctor will see you now! Show me what you've got! I just watched my best friend die in agony. My day can't get any worse. Let's see what we can do about yours!
(A black and white circular image forms on the screens. It is a view of him, from someone looking through a narrow slit in a wall. He looks out of the nearest opening at the wall across the courtyard. It has narrow slit openings, and there is a figure in pale grey veils standing at one of them, presumable the Veil of the cast list. He backs away and checks the view on the nearest screen. The hunchbacked figure turns away from the slit and moves along the corridor. According to the screens, the being moves slowly, as if it is dragging a leg. Each step is a thump, and they get closer. The Doctor wafts away a fly, then retreats from the approaching sounds. He runs down a narrow corridor to a wooden door, but it is locked. He is about to run back, but the being is at the other end of the bridge.)
DOCTOR: I know you. I've seen you before.
(He runs back to the door and puts both hands on it.)
DOCTOR: I used to know a trick, back when I was young and telepathic. Clearly, you can't make an actual psychic link with a door, for one very obvious reason. They're notoriously cross. I mean, imagine life as a door. People keep pushing past you. All of that knocking, but it's never for you. And you get locked up every night, so if you're just a little bit nice.
(The door unlocks.)
DOCTOR: See, Clara? Still got it.
(He opens the door to reveal a solid wall just a pace behind it. The Veil has almost arrived.)
DOCTOR: But I. Er,  I can't actually see a way out of this  I've finally run out of corridor. There's a life summed up. Oh, now this is new. I'm scared. I just realised that I'm actually scared of dying.
(The Veil has arrived, and is just reaching out with its four-fingered hands, when it stops dead, with a clang.)
DOCTOR: Something I said? What did I say?
(Even the Veil's attendant flies are frozen in the air. He flicks one away.)
DOCTOR: Why did you stop?
(There is a loud cracking and rumbling of cogs. He looks out of an opening to see a sections of the walls rotating in opposite directions with the uppermost faster than the lower ones, rather like the upper section of the Tardis time rotor does nowadays. The obstructing wall moves aside and he runs into the revealed room.)

[Bedroom]

(The cogs stop. The Doctor tests the springs in the bed then picks one of the stems of hemerocallis from a vase by the window and sniffs it. Then he sees a portrait hanging over the fireplace, it's paint and varnish old and cracked and peeling. It is, of course, a painting of Clara Oswald. He picks up a jeweller's eyeglass that is conveniently by the frame and examines the state of the oils, not noticing that the screen in the room shows him examining the painting. The Veil is arriving.)
DOCTOR: Old. Very old. Possibly very, very old.
(Then he sees a fly land on the portrait. He drops the glass from his eye and turns to face the Veil.)
DOCTOR: When I was a very little boy, there was an old lady who died. (cheek pop) They covered her in veils, but it was a hot, sunny day, and the flies came. It gave me nightmares for years. So, who's been stealing my nightmares?
(He plucks petals from the flowers.)
DOCTOR: What am I here for? You've known about me for a very long time, right?
(He puts the eyeglass back in and dodges around to see if the Veil can actually see him.)
DOCTOR: So, what is it? Is it a trap? Is it a prison? No! Is it a torture chamber? Am I right? Somebody really should know better. Anyone who can put all of this together and steal my bad dreams, they should know better.
(He lets the jeweller's eyeglass fall to the floor with a metallic clatter.)
DOCTOR: The secrets I have? No chance. No telling, not me.
(He ducks under the veiled being's arms and grabs a wooden stool to fend it off.)
DOCTOR; I told you I was scared of dying. And I wasn't lying either. Advantage, me!
(He throws the stool through a leaded window. The wind is blowing.)
DOCTOR: Because you won't see this coming!
(The Doctor dives through the broken window...)

[Tardis]

(And bursts in through the doors. He goes to the console, pushing the scanner screen aside and working controls. We get intercut shots of him plummeting ever downwards.)
DOCTOR: Sorry I'm late. Jumped out of a window. Certain death. Don't you want to know how I survived? Go on. Ask me! No, of course I had to jump! The first rule of being interrogated is that you are the only irreplaceable person in the torture chamber. The room is yours, so work it. If they're going to threaten you with death, show them who's boss. Die faster. And you've seen me do that more often than most. Isn't that right, Clara? Rule one of dying, don't. Rule two, slow down.
(The Doctor slows to almost no movement in mid-fall. There is a figure in the Tardis with her back to him.)
DOCTOR: You've got the rest of your life. The faster you think, the slower it will pass. Concentrate. Assume you're going to survive. Always assume that. Imagine you've already survived. There's a storm room in your mind. Lock the door and think. This is my storm room. I always imagine that I'm back in my Tardis, showing off, telling you how I escaped, making you laugh. That's what I'm doing right now. I am falling, Clara. I'm dying. And I am going to explain to you how I survived. I can't wait to hear what I say. I'm nothing without an audience. One hope. Salt.
(The stool smashes the window.)
DOCTOR: Thought I smelled it earlier. When I broke the window, I was sure. Salty air. This castle is standing in the sea.
(A schematic is on the scanner.)
DOCTOR:  Diving into water from a great height is no guarantee of survival. I need to know exactly how far I'm going to fall, and how fast.
(Calculations are scrolling up the scanner as the top of the time rotor turns.)
DOCTOR: Why do you think I threw the stool? (breaking glass) Fall time to impact (splash) seven seconds.
DOCTOR [bedroom]: Because you won't see this coming!
DOCTOR: The wind resistance of the stool, the atmospheric density, (the petals falling) the strength of the local gravity. (the fall of the jeweller's glass.) Am I spoiling the magic? I work at this stuff, you know? Should hit the water in about
(The Doctor stretches out his arms into a dive.)
DOCTOR: Point zero two seconds. The chances of remaining conscious are
(Splash! The Doctor enters the water and gently floats downwards. The Tardis has gone dark, then lights up again, roundel layer by roundel layer. Someone is writing on a blackboard with chalk.)
BLACKBOARD: Question 1. What is this place?
DOCTOR: Can't I just sleep?
BLACKBOARD: Question 2. What did you say that made the creature stop?
DOCTOR: Do I have to know everything?
BLACKBOARD: How are you going to
DOCTOR: Clara, I can't always
BLACKBOARD: Win?? (with seven underlines.)

(Filtered sunlight reveals that the sea bed is covered in long humanoid skulls. Fully conscious again, the Doctor swims up to the surface and gasps for breath. A short time later he has climbed out. The castle has a central tower with four spokes coming off it on two levels, connecting to the outer circular wall. From above it looks rather like a cog wheel.
Dripping wet, he walks up a staircase into a room with a roaring log fire. There are a pair of boots in front of the hearth, and trousers, jacket, waistcoat, shirt all on a wooden clothes horse to the side. The Doctor warms himself briefly, then compares the cuff buttons on the dry jacket with his own. They are identical. He exchanges his wet clothes for the dry ones. After a brief pause he puts his wet garments back exactly where he found the dry ones, and stands both boots up.
From the drying room, he walks through the great hall - of Caerphilly Castle - with a dining table set for one in the middle and on into a...

[Storeroom]

(This storeroom with a hexagon shaped hole in the flagstones, and chalked arrows pointing in towards each side. He touches the sand in the bottom of it.)
DOCTOR: It keeps coming, Clara. Wherever I go, it follows. Why? Why does it do that?
BLACKBOARD: Wrong question.
DOCTOR: Always the teacher. What's the right question, then?
BLACKBOARD: Not why. What?
DOCTOR: It's following me. Wherever I go, it's tracking me. Slowly though. Scary lurching. Scary. These screens, everywhere. It's showing me exactly where it is all the time, how far it's got, how near. Because it's trying to scare me. Putting its breath on my neck. That's the point. That's what it's doing. This is theatre. It's all about fear. Working hypothesis. I'm in a fully automated haunted house. A mechanical maze.
(A copper pan hanging up rattles.)
DOCTOR: It's a killer puzzle box designed to scare me to death, and I'm trapped inside it. (laughs) Must be Christmas.
(Heavy doors open somewhere. The Doctor walks out into a dark corridor. Water drips somewhere. He opens a creaky door into -)

[Garden]

(The trees and shrubs look nearly dead in the near permanent shade of the tiny inner courtyard. The door slams shut behind him, making him jump. A bell is ringing somewhere. The garden is laid out with a cogwheel design to the paths. At the centre is an empty round bed with a recently dug rectangle in the middle, like a screwdriver slot. The Doctor feels the quality of the worked soil, then sees a clean spade leaning against the wall.)
DOCTOR: Another spade? Someone wants me to dig. What do you think, Clara? Is someone trying to give me a hint? What would you do?
BLACKBOARD: Same as you.
DOCTOR: Yes. Yes, of course you would.
(He takes the spade.)
DOCTOR: Which, let's be honest, is what killed you. So, someone is trying to tell me that there's something important buried in this garden. That's almost the first thing they tried to tell me. Could be a trick. Could be one of my predecessors. Because I'm not the first prisoner here, am I! All those skulls! Wonder where they all went wrong. Building this height, creature that slow, so what? An hour.
(He excavates the dug soil as the Veil and its attendant flies come closer. When one buzzes his face, he runs to a window to check the screen inside. It is a view of a piece of wood with flies on it. So he opens the door, and the Veil is there, screeching at him. The Doctor slams the door, trapping its hands, until it finally withdraws them. He jams the spade under the door handle, digging its blade into the gravel path.)
DOCTOR: Physics of a triangle. You lose.
(The door stops shaking and the Veil leaves.)
DOCTOR: So? It can set traps. That's okay. I'm good at traps.
(Nervously he checks the view on the screen. It is the storeroom with its hexagon in the floor.)
DOCTOR: So, where are you off to? Only one way in and one way out. Well, seeing as you're going.
(He retrieves the spade, jumps back into the hole and carries on digging. As night falls and crickets chirp, he is about four foot down and tired, so he pauses to look up at the dark sky.)
DOCTOR: No, no. That's not right.
(The spade hits something. Sounds like stone by the scrape. He uses his hands to clear the remaining soil so he can read what has been carved into it. I Am. He recalls the hexagon. Flies start to buzz as he uncovers. In 12. A fly buzzes in front of him, then the Veil jumps down into the grave-sized hole. The Doctor falls backwards as it reaches for him.)

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: Well, that was another close one. Or it will have been, once I've been and gone and got myself out of it. So, how am I going to do that? Come on, teacher, ask me questions!
(The back of the woman moves aside to reveal what she has written on the blackboard.)
BLACKBOARD: Tell no lies.
DOCTOR [tower]: I'm actually scared of dying.
BLACKBOARD: Question 2. What did you say that made the creature stop?
DOCTOR: The truth, yes. But not any old truth, Clara. This whole place is designed to terrify me. I'm being interrogated. It's not just truth it wants. That's not enough. It's confession. I have to tell truths I've never told before. That's the only thing that stops it. You see, the problem is, Clara, there are truths that I can never tell. Not for anything. But I'm scared and I'm alone. Alone, and very, very scared.
(He sits on the steps to the gallery.)
DOCTOR: I confess.

[Garden]

DOCTOR: I didn't leave Gallifrey because I was bored! That was a lie! It's always been a lie!
(The Veil pauses.)
DOCTOR: Not enough? You want more? I was scared! I ran because I was scared! Is that what you want me to say? Is that true enough for you?
(The Veil withdraws its hand, the castle rumbles. The Doctor climbs out of the grave to see the various floors rotating in opposite directions again. He runs inside then through to the wall on the outside of the castle, and looks out across the endless sea. A pair of skulls are dislodged from the seabed and float to the surface. The castle stops moving and they drift back down again.)

[Bedroom]

(A clock ticks, but it is actually the Doctor tapping a finger against the arm of his chair.)
DOCTOR [OC]: It's funny, the day you lose someone isn't the worst. At least you've got something to do. It's all the days they stay dead.
(The flies arrive.)
DOCTOR: Fifty seven minutes?
(He gets up and leaves just ahead of the Veil's arrival. )

(Tapping the bannister of a big staircase.)
DOCTOR [OC]: This is how my world works, Clara. I tick off the seconds as they pass. My life is a countdown.
(A door thuds. He runs down and through a long gallery to another big room.)
DOCTOR [OC]: If I draw the creature to one extreme of the castle, and I run to the other extreme, I can earn myself a maximum of eighty two minutes. Eighty two minutes to eat, sleep and work. My work is finding Room 12. (He goes through door 46) The castle wants me to. It's luring me. (He checks his notebook.) The numbering is a bit confused, (backs away from door 7) as if the rooms are all jumbled up. Maybe they move around. I saw the whole castle move, when I made the creature stop.
(Back in the garden, the grave is filled in again.)
DOCTOR [OC]: Every room, if I leave it long enough, reverts to its condition at the moment I arrive. It tidies up after itself.
(The flowers are in the bedroom vase, intact. He remembers plucking the petals.)
DOCTOR [OC]: Automated room service.
(He has a meal in the Great Hall, soup served in a pewter dish, which he eats with a pewter spoon. A metal goblet and a plate of bread rolls are also on the fabric place mat.)
DOCTOR [OC]: I think this whole place is inside a closed energy loop, constantly recycling. Or maybe I'm in Hell? That's okay. I'm not scared of Hell. It's just Heaven for bad people. But how long will I have to be here? Forever?
(He lets the spoon drop. From a corridor above the Great Hall he sees the Veil near the table.)
DOCTOR [OC]: It's always coming. Always closer. The countdown never stops. But the countdown to what?

[Teleport chamber room]

DOCTOR [OC]: There are two events in everybody's life that nobody remembers. Two moments experienced by every living thing, yet no one remembers anything about them. Nobody remembers being born and nobody remembers dying.
(He finds a skull with power leads attached to its temples on the floor by the control console, and picks it up. Alas, poor Yorick.)
DOCTOR [OC]: Is that why we always stare into the eye sockets of a skull?
(He removes the power leads and stands.)
DOCTOR [OC]: Because we're asking, what was it like? Does it hurt? Are you still scared?
(He sees a word written in the sand or dust.)
DOCTOR: Bird? What's bird got to do with it? Are there birds here?
(The cogs start turning and the word disappears. A piece of wall slides away to reveal the entrance to a spiral staircase.)

[Tower]

(The Doctor climbs the steps to the battlements at the top of the tower, and places Yorick in a crenellation overlooking the sea.)
DOCTOR [OC]: There's something I'm missing, Clara, and I think it's something terrible.
(He looks up at the stars. Back inside the tower, he hears a door open and close, and heads down some steps to find a door labelled 12. He opens it, but the way into the room beyond is blocked by masonry. Light streams through the gap on the left hand side.)
DOCTOR: Hello? Hello, is there someone there? Hello!
DOCTOR [OC]: It's a trap, Clara. A lure and a trap.
(The Doctor's head morphs into Yorick up on the battlements and he looks at the stars again.)
DOCTOR: I'm following breadcrumbs laid out for me. This is somebody's game, and I can't stop playing. A game everybody else has lost. I know how to move that wall, Clara, so long as I don't run out of confessions. But what I really want to know is
(Flies buzz.)
DOCTOR: Who's been playing about with the stars? They're all in the wrong places, for this time zone, anyway. I know I didn't time travel to get here. I can feel time travel.
(The Veil is coming up behind him.)
DOCTOR: If I didn't know better, I'd say I've travelled seven thousand years into the future. But I do know better. So who moved the stars?
(The Veil reaches its hands either side of his face.)
DOCTOR: The Hybrid.
(The Veil pauses and he turns around to face it.)
DOCTOR: Long before the Time War, the Time Lords knew it was coming, like a storm on the wind. There were many prophecies and stories, legends before the fact. One of them was about a creature called the Hybrid. Half Dalek, half Time Lord, the ultimate warrior. But whose side would it be on? Would it bring peace or destruction? Was it real, or a fantasy? I confess, I know the Hybrid is real. I know where it is, and what it is. I confess, I'm afraid.
(The Veil leaves and the castle reconfigures. The rumbling shakes Yorick off the battlements and it plummets into the sea to join all the other identical skulls.)

[Room 12]

(The Doctor runs back down the stairs and opens the doors. The masonry blocking the way has gone. As he enters, he slaps his fingers against his palm to count the seconds. The Veil is coming. The Doctor walks down the smooth narrow passage and puts his sonic sunglasses on. He takes them off when he reaches the wall of crystal at the far end with the word Home carved in it. But the word disappears after a few moments. A dark rectangular shape can just be made out through the crystal.)
DOCTOR: Of course. The last square on the board. What else would it be? The Tardis. One confession away.
(He puts the sunglasses back on.)
DOCTOR: Azbantium. Four hundred times harder than diamond. Twenty feet thick. The way out.
(He remembers the word in the dust in the teleport chamber room.)
DOCTOR: Bird?

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: (angry) That's when I remember! Always then. Always then. Always exactly then! I can't keep doing this, Clara! I can't! Why is it always me? Why is it never anybody else's turn?
BLACKBOARD: How are you going to win?? (seven underlines.)
DOCTOR: Can't I just lose? Just this once?
(He hides under the time rotor assembly.)
DOCTOR; Easy. It would be easy. It would be so easy. Just tell them. Just tell them, whoever wants to know, all about the Hybrid.
(The Doctor is sitting on the ground in a channel cut part way through the Azbantium, as the Veil arrives in room 12. In the Tardis, in his head, he comes out and runs around the console room.)
DOCTOR: I can't keep doing this. I can't! I can't always do this! It's not fair! Clara, it's just not fair! Why can't I just lose?
BLACKBOARD: No!
DOCTOR: But I can remember, Clara.You don't understand, I can remember it all. Every time. And you'll still be gone. Whatever I do, you still won't be there.
(He sits on the stairs to the lower level, distraught.)
CLARA [OC]: Doctor, you are not the only person who ever lost someone. It's the story of everybody. Get over it. Beat it. Break free. 
(Her hand touches his cheek.)
CLARA: Doctor, it's time. Get up, off your arse, and win!

[Room 12]

(The Doctor stands to face the Veil as it enters the room.)
DOCTOR; Hello again. No more confessions, sorry. But I will tell you the truth.
(The Doctor punches the Azbantium wall, and cries out in pain.)
DOCTOR: The Hybrid is a very dangerous secret. A very, very dangerous secret and it needs to be kept!
(Another punch, another cry of pain.)
DOCTOR: So I'm telling you nothing. Nothing at all. Instead, I'm going to do something far worse. (punch) Argh! I'm going to get out of here, and find whoever put me here in the first place, and whatever they're trying to do, I'm going to stop it! (punch) Argh!
(The Doctor doubles over in pain.)
DOCTOR: But it might take me a little while, so do you want me to tell you a story? (punch) Argh! The Brothers Grimm, lovely fellas. They're on my darts team. (punch) Argh! According to them, there's this emperor and he asks this shepherd's boy, how many seconds in eternity?
(The Veil's scaly hands close across the Doctor's eyes and he screams as steam rises from his skin then falls to the ground. The Veil is teleported away and the screens revert to static. Silence reigns.)

[Tardis]

The Doctor's storm room slowly lights up.)
DOCTOR: People always get it wrong with Time Lords. We take forever to die. Even if we're too injured to regenerate, every cell in our bodies keeps trying. Dying properly can take days. That's why we like to die among our own kind. They know not to bury us early.
(The mortally injured Doctor drags himself up a spiral staircase.)
DOCTOR: I think, in my current condition, it'll take me about a day and a half to reach the top of the tower. I think. If I'm lucky, I have a day and a half.
(The Doctor drags himself along a corridor, leaving smears of blood behind.)
DOCTOR: I have to do this, Clara. It's the only way. I have to be strong. I should have known from the very beginning. Of course. The portrait of you, the creature from my own nightmares. This place is my own bespoke torture chamber, intended for me only. And all those skulls in the water. How could there be other prisoners in my Hell? The answer, of course, is there never were any other prisoners. And the stars, they weren't in the wrong place, and I haven't time travelled.
(He collapses onto the floor of the Tardis as he actually reaches the teleport chamber room.)
DOCTOR: I've just been here a very, very long time. Every room resets. Remember I told you that? Every room reverts to its original condition. Logically, the teleporter should do the same. Teleporter. Fancy word. Just like 3D printers, really, except they break down living matter and information, and transmit it. All you have to do is add energy. The room has reset, returned to its original condition when I arrived. That means there's a copy of me still in the hard drive. Me, exactly as I was, when I first got here, seven thousand years ago. All I have to find is some energy.
(He picks up the power cables and attaches them to his temples.)
DOCTOR: And all you need for energy is something to burn.
(It is the dying Doctor who takes hold of the lever and pulls it down, sending power into the transporter console. When he finally falls to the ground, the cogs turn, the teleporter powers up, and he writes Bird in the dust with his last ounce of strength.
DOCTOR: How long can I keep doing this, Clara? Burning the old me, to make a new one?
(The Tardis goes dark. The burnt hand turns to dust. The bloodstains on the flagstones disappear. We are back to the start of the show.)

[Teleport chamber room]

(The Doctor gasps and coughs in the teleport chamber. The cogs stop turning and he gets out, closing the door behind him before scooping up dust and letting it run through his fingers.)
DOCTOR: If you think because she's dead, I am weak, then you understand very little. If you were any part of killing her and you're not afraid, then you understand nothing at all. So, for your own sake, understand this. I'm the Doctor. I'm coming to find you, and I will never, ever stop.

(After he leaves the room, the camera sweeps across the word Bird to the skull with power leads attached. Then the Doctor is throwing the stool through the window.)
DOCTOR [bedroom]: Because you won't see this coming!
(He dives into the sea and sees all the skulls. He exchanges his wet clothes for the dry set and excavates the grave again. He picks up Yorick and ends up on the top of the tower with the Veil behind him.)
DOCTOR: If I didn't know better, I'd say I've travelled seven thousand years into the future.
(Yorick falls into the sea, the Doctor opens the door to room 12 and punches a few more molecules off the Azbantium wall.)
DOCTOR: Aah! How many seconds in eternity?
(He crawls back to the teleport to do it all again.)
DOCTOR [tower]: If I didn't know better, I'd say I've travelled twelve thousand years into the future.
DOCTOR [room 12]: How many seconds in eternity? And the shepherd's boy Argh!
(And again.)
DOCTOR [tower]: Six hundred thousand years into the future.
DOCTOR [room 12]: Argh! How many seconds in eternity? And the shepherd's boy says Argh!
(Digging again, dropping the spoon in the soup.)
DOCTOR [tower]: Twelve hundred thousand years into the future.
DOCTOR [room 12]: Argh! And the shepherd's boy says Argh!
DOCTOR [tower]: Two million years into the future.
DOCTOR [room 12]: And the shepherd's boy says
(And again, and again, and again, getting dizzy with the flashing excerpts...)
DOCTOR [tower]: Twenty million years into the future.
DOCTOR [room 12]: Ow! And the shepherd's boy says, there's this mountain of pure diamond. It takes an hour to climb it, and an hour to go around it!
(Even faster flashes of scenes.)
DOCTOR [tower]: 52 million years.
DOCTOR [room 12]: Every hundred years, a little bird comes and sharpens its beak on the diamond mountain.
(Faster still.)
DOCTOR [tower]: Nearly a billion years.
DOCTOR [room 12]: Argh! And when the entire mountain is chiselled away, the first second of eternity will have passed!
(Faster still.)
DOCTOR [tower]: Well over a billion years.
DOCTOR [room 12]: Argh! You must think that's a hell of a long time,
(More and more.)
DOCTOR [tower]: Two billion years.
DOCTOR [room 12]: Personally, I think that's a hell of a
(Again.)

[Room 12]

(The Doctor charges the remaining layer of crystal at the end of the twenty foot tunnel.)
DOCTOR: Aaargh!
(The Azbantium finally gives way. Bright light floods in and the Veil explodes, cogwheels and shrouds falling to the floor.)
DOCTOR: Personally, I think that's a hell of a bird.

[Planet surface]

(The Doctor walks out of the portal created by the hole in the Azbantium onto a dry planet with a golden sky. The portal closes and a small round metal object falls to the ground. The Doctor picks up a miniature of the castle surrounded by blue water. Brass cogwheels fill the space and then an engraved cover closes over it. It is his confession dial. A small boy runs up to him.)
DOCTOR: Go to the city. Find somebody important. Tell them I'm back. Tell them, I know what they did, and I'm on my way. And if they ask you who I am, tell them I came the long way round.
(The boy runs off towards a tall metallic city with a towering Citadel at its heart. The Doctor speaks to his confession dial.)
DOCTOR: You can probably still hear me, so just between ourselves, you've got the prophecy wrong. The Hybrid is not half Dalek. Nothing is half Dalek. The Daleks would never allow that. The Hybrid destined to conquer Gallifrey and stand in its ruins
(The Doctor dons his sonic sunglasses.)
DOCTOR: Is me.


Nevada USA. A pickup truck drives along a lonely dirt road and pulls up at a snacks and gas stop at Jackson - no matter where you go, there you are. The Doctor gets out of the passenger's side, wearing his sunglasses and with his guitar and a pack slung over his shoulder. (Sartorial note - the burgundy frock coat has been replaced by a double-breasted black jacket.) He enters the

[Diner]

(Welcome to Eddie's Diner, Mermaid Quay, looking pretty much as it did in The Impossible Astronaut. The sole employee has her back to us but we know who she is, in that royal blue mini-dress uniform. The music system is playing Foxes' jazz cover of that Queen classic, as performed in Mummy on the Orient Express.)
FOXES:  Don't stop me now, I'm having such a good time, I'm having a ball 
CLARA: Hi. What can I get you?
DOCTOR: I don't have any money. But I play.
CLARA: Okay.
(The Doctor sits on a stool at the counter.)
CLARA: Don't you need to plug that thing in?
DOCTOR: Yeah.
He takes off his sunglasses and places them by the transistor radio, then activates them.)
DOCTOR: You're English.
CLARA: You're not.
DOCTOR: How did you get out here?
CLARA: Magic. Or maybe I went to an airport and caught a plane.
DOCTOR: Ah.
CLARA: You?
DOCTOR: Magic.
(He strums his guitar and the sound comes through the transistor radio, then crackles into the diner's sound system.
CLARA: I believe you. You been travelling?
DOCTOR: Yeah, from time to time.
(He plays a slightly melancholy tune on his guitar.)
CLARA: Is it a sad song?
DOCTOR: Nothing's sad till it's over. Then everything is.
CLARA: What's it called?
DOCTOR: I think that it's called Clara.
CLARA: Tell me about her.

(On Gallifrey, the Doctor - with the black jacket slung over his shoulder - walks away from the city and towards an old barn. The wind whistles across the barren landscape.)

[Council Chamber]

(In the city, the Lord President is in full regalia and holding his staff, as bells toll deep within the Citadel.)
GENERAL: Lord President?
RASSILON: Are all the bells ringing? The whole cloister?
(The General uses his wrist communicator.)
GENERAL: What's going on down there?

[Cloister entrance]
GASTRON: On my way down to the Matrix now, sir.
GENERAL [OC]: Keep the perimeter. It's okay to be afraid down there, soldier.
GASTRON: Sliders are everywhere, sir. Loads of the things.
(The shadow of a Time Lord glides past.)
GENERAL [OC]: Language, please. I'm with the President.
GASTRON: Sorry, sir. The Cloister Wraiths are active.

[Council Chamber]

GENERAL: Do not approach them. Don't even enter the cloister. Just tell me

[Cloister entrance]

GENERAL [OC]: Are all the bells ringing?
GASTRON: Yes, sir.

[Council Chamber]

RASSILON: Then we are facing great danger.
GENERAL: The Cloister Wraiths seem to think so.
RASSILON: So, where is he? Where has the Doctor gone?
(The leader of the Sisterhood of Karn enters with two bodyguards.)
OHILA: Back to the beginning, I should think.
RASSILON: The Sisterhood of Karn has no business in this chamber, or on this planet.
OHILA: I heard the Doctor had come home. One so loves fireworks.
RASSILON: Bah.
(And turns his back on her.)

[Barn]

(The Cloister Bells can be heard way out here. The Doctor climbs the short ladder to the bed that Clara had hidden under in Listen. An old woman enters, fussing.)
WOMAN: Why are they ringing all the bells? Never heard so many. What's gone wrong this time? All the fuss they're always making.
(She notices the Doctor.)
WOMAN: You, up there! You're not supposed to be there! I've just put all that back. It's for the boys, if any of them ever want to come
(Then she sees his face, and realises who it is. He nods.)
WOMAN: They'll kill you.

[Outside the barn]

(The Doctor sits at the top end of a table, and the woman places a bowl of tomato soup in front of him. All the villagers are gathered, in their homespun frontier style clothes. A stark contrast to the highly advanced Citadel dwellers. The Doctor raises his spoon in salute. The ground shakes as a massive craft casts its shadow over them, forward gun turrets pointed at the Doctor.)
GASTRON [OC]: Attention! Will all non-military personnel step away from the Doctor.
(Nobody moves.)

[Gunship]

GASTRON: I repeat. All non-military personnel, please, step away from the Doctor.

[Outside the barn]

GASTRON: At least move the children away! Doctor

[Gunship]

GASTRON: You will lay down any weapons on your person and accompany us to the capital.

[Outside the barn]

(The Doctor drops his spoon onto the table and gets up. The villagers part to let him through, and Gastron backs up his gunship to keep the Doctor in his sights.)
GASTRON [OC]: Doctor, you will accompany us to the Capitol.
(The Doctor digs his heel into the sand and draws a line.)
GASTRON [OC]: Doctor?

[Gunship]

(The Doctor returns to his meal.)
GASTRON: Come back. You will come back immediately.

[Outside the barn]

(The villagers applaud the Doctor.)
GASTRON [OC]: That is an order and this is a military vehicle.

[Council chamber]

(They are watching on a holo-screen here, too.)
RASSILON: What's his plan?
OHILA: I think he's finishing his soup.
GENERAL: Suggestion, sir.

[Barn]

(The Doctor is lying on his childhood bed, staring at nothing and twiddling his thumbs.)
GENERAL [OC]: We could talk to him.
RASSILON [OC]: Words are his weapons.
GENERAL [OC]: When did they stop being ours?
(There is a knock on the door. The woman comes to see if he will answer it.)

[Outside the barn]

(The Doctor opens the door and steps out. The General is there with Gastron and nine armed troopers.)
GENERAL: Welcome home, sir. As commander of the armed forces of Gallifrey, I bring you the greetings of the High Council.
(But the Doctor has already turned and gone back inside. The General activates his wrist communicator.)
RASSILON [hologram]:Who the hell does he think he is?'
GENERAL: The man who won the Time War, sir.
(The Doctor puts on his black jacket as there is more knocking at the door. This time it is six Time Lords in full regalia who bow to him. The door slams shut again.)

[Council chamber]

RASSILON: What is he doing? What does he want? Revenge?
OHILA: The Doctor does not blame Gallifrey for the horrors of the Time War.
RASSILON: I should hope not.
OHILA: He just blames you.

[Outside the barn]

(The Doctor is sitting on his bed holding his confession dial when the woman knocks and comes in again. The Doctor goes outside. This time Lord President Rassilon is there in full regalia, with the General, Gastron and the nine troopers. The Doctor walks up to the line he drew in the sand and ignores Rassilon's proffered hand. Instead, he throws his confession dial into the line.)
DOCTOR: Get off my planet.
RASSILON: We needed to know. You have information about the Hybrid. A danger to all of us. If you'd told us what you knew, you could have walked out of there.
DOCTOR: Get off my planet.
RASSILON: You have nothing, Doctor. Nothing! Do you know what I have, out here in the Dry Lands, where there's nobody who matters? (sotto) No witnesses.
DOCTOR: (sotto) Me too.
RASSILON: Take aim! Aim at the Doctor. Fire on my command.
(The General and his troopers are reluctant to obey.)
GENERAL: Sir?
RASSILON: Step forward and take aim! What's the matter with you?
GENERAL: Lord President, he's a war hero. Some of these men served with him.
RASSILON: These men serve me! All of you! On my command.
(The troopers raise their weapons, Gastron last of all. The Doctor closes his eyes. Rassilon turns his back.)
RASSILON: Fire!
(A fusillade of energy bolts rings out.)
DOCTOR [OC]: Could I have a lemonade?

[Diner]

CLARA: Oh, you like a cliffhanger, don't you? So you went back to your home town
DOCTOR: Something like that. (She pours them both a drink from a large pitcher.)
CLARA: Glasgow?
DOCTOR: Er, well, sort of Glasgow. Space Glasgow.
CLARA: And there was this gang boss and he wanted to kill you.
DOCTOR: Wanted to, yeah.

[Outside the barn]

(When the General and Rassilon can bring themselves to look, the Doctor is still standing, and the barn door has scorch marks on it.)
RASSILON: You missed. All of you. Every single one of you! How is that possible? What is it? Is the firing squad afraid of the unarmed man?
(Rassilon grabs Gastron by the scuff of the neck.)
RASSILON: You, explain.
GASTRON: There was a saying, sir, in the Time War.
RASSILON: A saying?
GASTRON: The first thing you will notice about the Doctor of War is he's unarmed. For many, it's also the last.
(Gastron walks forward, drops his rifle, then crosses the line and stands by the Doctor.)
GASTRON: I was at Skull Moon, sir.

[Diner]

CLARA: Is this a story or did this really happen?
DOCTOR: Every story ever told really happened. Stories are where memories go when they're forgotten.

[Outside the barn]

(Four more troopers drop their rifles and join the Doctor's side.)
RASSILON: Not one more of you moves! That is an order!
(Two more troopers move forward to cross the line.)
RASSILON: A direct order of your President! You leave me no choice.
(Rassilon activates his gauntlet.)
RASSILON: How many regenerations did we grant you? I've got all night.
(Four gunships arrive.)
RASSILON: Excellent, General. You sent for reinforcements.
DOCTOR: No, he didn't.
(He puts on his sonic sunglasses.)
DOCTOR: I did.
(The final troopers join the Doctor as the gunships train their weapons on Rassilon.)
RASSILON: What? I am Rassilon the redeemer! Rassilon, the resurrected! Gallifrey is mine!
(The General moves between Rassilon's gauntlet and the Doctor.)
GENERAL: Lord President, with respect, get off his planet.
(The General throws down his sidearm and stand by the Doctor. There are now six gunships aiming their weaponry at Rassilon.)

[Council chamber]

(Later, a small craft leaves the Citadel and flies off through the forcefield. The Doctor, the General and Gastron watch it go.)
GENERAL: Gallifrey is currently positioned at the extreme end of the time continuum, for its own protection. We're at the end of the universe, give or take a star system.
DOCTOR: I know. I came the long way round.
GENERAL: The President may not find anywhere to go.
DOCTOR: He's not the President any more.
GENERAL: He was a good man once. Isn't this going a little far?
DOCTOR: Oh, I've barely started. Tell the High Council they're on the next shuttle.

[Cloisters]

(The Doctor steps out of the lift that Gastron had cowered in earlier. The cloisters have a bit of mist on the floor, lots of stone columns and various cabling dangling around. The lighting is low, casting long shadows. There is the occasional shriek, and silhouettes of Time Lords glide around at intervals. In short, a haunted undercroft.)
OHILA: I thought I'd find you down here. Old times.
DOCTOR: You're a long way from Karn.
OHILA: At the end of everything, one must expect the company of immortals.
DOCTOR: Do you know what they did to me? A confession dial is a ritual act of purification. It allows a dying Time Lord to face his demons and make his peace, before his mind is uploaded to the Matrix. It was never intended as a torture chamber for the living.
OHILA: Rassilon grew concerned about the coming of the Hybrid.
DOCTOR: Afraid!
OHILA: You were entrapped and imprisoned at his command.
DOCTOR: And look at him now.
OHILA: Why did you banish him? Was it punishment, or for your own protection? Or are you just being cruel? Or just being cowardly?
DOCTOR: Let's see, shall we?

[Council chamber]

(The Doctor is seated at the head of the table, on an ornately carved high-backed chair. Ohila sits at the opposite end, watching carefully.)
DOCTOR: If you wanted to know about the Hybrid, why didn't you just ask me?
GENERAL: If the Hybrid is a threat to the people of this world, why don't you just tell us?
DOCTOR: What do you know already?
(The General sits.)
GENERAL: The Hybrid is a legendary
DOCTOR: No.
GENERAL: The Hybrid is a creature thought to be crossbred from two warrior races.
DOCTOR: Which races?
GENERAL: The Daleks and the Time Lords, it is supposed.
DOCTOR: Oh, must be well hard, then.
GENERAL: Unstoppable. According to the stories.
DOCTOR: If they're just stories, why are you so worried?
GENERAL: Some Matrix prophecies suggest
DOCTOR: No.
GENERAL: Many prophesies suggest
DOCTOR: No.
GENERAL: All Matrix prophecies concur that this creature will one day stand in the ruins of Gallifrey. It will unravel the Web of Time and destroy a billion billion hearts to heal its own.
DOCTOR: What colour is it?
GENERAL: I don't know.
DOCTOR: Prophecies, they never tell you anything useful, do they?
OHILA: This is no time to play the fool.
DOCTOR: It's the end of the universe. It's the only time I've got. And you want me to keep you all safe.
GENERAL: Can you?
DOCTOR: I'll need help, obviously.
GENERAL: Gallifrey is at your command.
DOCTOR: Oh, not from you lot. No, you'd cramp my style. Look at your hats. I'm going to need the use of an extraction chamber, to talk to an old friend.

[Trap Street]

(Heart thumping, the raven caws and launches itself at Clara.)
CLARA: Let me be brave.
(She throws her arms wide then Time stops with a crack! After a moment, Clara exhales and relaxes. A door opens, flooding white light into the street.)
DOCTOR: This way. I can save you.
(Clara looks at the frozen raven, and the Doctor watching from behind her, then follows the Doctor through the door.)

[Extraction chamber]

(An all-white room, with operatives dressed in white too. The only colour are their faces, the General, the Doctor, and Clara, and some blue computer panels.)
CLARA: Doctor?
DOCTOR: Yeah.
CLARA: Where am I? Is this the Tardis?
DOCTOR: No. This is a planet.
CLARA: What planet?
DOCTOR: Basically, my place.
CLARA: I was about to die. I should be dead.
DOCTOR: Forget about that. It doesn't matter.
CLARA: Hang on, your place?
DOCTOR: Yeah.
CLARA: What do you mean, your place?
DOCTOR: My place.
CLARA: You don't mean?
DOCTOR: Yeah.
CLARA: Gallifrey?
DOCTOR: Gallifrey.
CLARA: Okay. Er, hang on, wait. What? What? Did I miss something?
DOCTOR: Well, we're several billion years in the future and the universe is pretty much over, so, yeah, quite a lot.
GENERAL: Young lady, Miss Oswald, I'm afraid we only have a very few minutes with you.
CLARA: Who's he?
GENERAL: According to the Doctor, you can tell us something about the creature known as the Hybrid.
CLARA: Oh. Oh, that's weird. What's wrong with my ears?
DOCTOR: Nothing.
CLARA: Oh, it's weird. Everything sounds wrong.
DOCTOR: It's a side effect.
CLARA: I can hear you. I can hear you fine. It's like, I don't know, it's like, er. It's like something's missing.
GENERAL: Doctor, we have to tell her. We always tell them.
CLARA: Tell me what? What's he talking about? Doctor? Doctor, what's going on?
DOCTOR: Clara, there's a sound you've been living with every day of your life, but you've learned not to hear.
CLARA: What sound? What's wrong? Just tell me. Doctor, what sound?
DOCTOR: Your heartbeat. Your physical processes have been time looped. Frozen between one heartbeat and the next. Even your breathing is just a habit. You don't need it.
CLARA: If I'm frozen, how can I, how can I be walking about?
DOCTOR: Because the Time Lords are very clever. It doesn't matter.
CLARA: Yes, it matters to me!
GENERAL: Doctor, we have to explain.
CLARA: Doctor, what is going on?
GENERAL: Although you are currently conscious and aware, in fact, you died billions of years ago.
CLARA: Doctor?
GENERAL: We have extracted you at the very end of your time stream to request your help. Once we're finished here, you will be returned to your final moments. Your death is an established historical event and cannot be altered. I'm sorry.
CLARA: Doctor, will you just talk to me!
DOCTOR: I'll try not to break your jaw.
CLARA: My jaw?
DOCTOR: I wasn't talking to you.
(The Doctor punches the General and snatches his sidearm, aiming it at the man.)
GENERAL: Doctor, you can't do this. You know you can't.
DOCTOR: No, General, I don't know that. Everybody, stay exactly where you are! No moving about. On pain of death, no-one take a selfie!
GENERAL: These people are unarmed.
DOCTOR: So are you.
GENERAL: Doctor, I will not let you leave here. That's the sidearm of the President's personal security. There isn't a stun setting.
DOCTOR: I will not let Clara die.
GENERAL: She's been dead for half the lifetime of the universe. If you tried to change that, you could fracture Time itself. Doctor, Lord President, are you really going to take that risk?
CLARA: Doctor. Please, I don't want this. Put it down, please.
DOCTOR: Regeneration?
GENERAL: Tenth.
DOCTOR: Good luck.
GENERAL: You too, sir.
(The Doctor shoots the General in the chest while holding Clara's hand.)
DOCTOR: I want a neural block. Human compatible. Quickly! Come on!
(A technician hands a device to the Doctor. Design note - it is three linked circles.)
DOCTOR: Come on, quick!
(The Doctor drags Clara out.)

[Diner]

(The Doctor is strumming his guitar.)
CLARA: This Clara person, you must really like her.
DOCTOR: Why do you say that?
CLARA: You killed a man. You don't seem the type.

[Citadel]

(Running.)
CLARA: You killed that man! You shot him! He's dead!
DOCTOR: It was him or you.
CLARA: I don't care!
DOCTOR: Yeah? Well, the difference is, when you die, you stay dead.
CLARA: So does he!
(They get into a lift.)
DOCTOR: We're on Gallifrey. Death is Time Lord for man flu.

[Extraction chamber]

(A golden light is dazzling everyone.)
GASTRON: Med team to sector fifty two, extraction chamber seven. Regeneration in progress.
(The regeneration ends, and where a white man had fallen, a black woman gets up.)
GASTRON: Are you all right, sir? Oh, er, sorry, ma'am.
GENERAL: Oh, back to normal, am I? The only time I've been a man, that last body. Dear Lord, how do you cope with all that ego?
(Ohila and her attendants enter.)
GASTRON: Ma'am, where's the Doctor?
OHILA: The Cloisters. Where else would he run, except into the greatest danger on Gallifrey.

[Cloisters]

OHILA [OC]: The hell of the Time Lords.
(The Doctor and Clara leave the lift and head into the Cloisters.)
CLARA: I thought you said Gallifrey was frozen in another dimension?
DOCTOR: Well, they must have unfrozen it and come back.
CLARA: How?
DOCTOR: I didn't ask. It would make them feel clever.
(He throws away the General's sidearm. It ends up at the feet of a small statue of a weeping angel cherub, entwined in cables. Thanks, Rocky, for identifying it!)
DOCTOR: Happy?
CLARA: No. Tell me what a neural block is.
DOCTOR: Never mind. This way.
CLARA: What did you mean, human compatible?

[Diner]

CLARA: So what was it, the thing you took?
DOCTOR: There was only one way to keep Clara safe. I had to wipe some of her memory.
CLARA: Of what?
DOCTOR: Of me.

[Cloisters]

(Screeches and other unnerving noises.)
DOCTOR: The Cloister Wraiths. Sliders, we used to call them. They guard the Matrix. We're safe in here.
CLARA: Why?
DOCTOR: They only attack if you make any attempt to leave.
CLARA: How long are we planning to stay?
DOCTOR: Or, actually, if you try to stay.
CLARA: You realise how well that conversation went, right?
DOCTOR: Starting to, yeah, a bit.
(A Wraith glides past, howling in terror, its face flickering.)

[Extraction chamber]

(They are monitoring the Doctor and Clara's movements on a holo-display.)
GENERAL: We need to block every exit from the Cloisters. Every available man. I need that place surrounded.
GASTRON: No-one's ever made it back out of the Cloisters.
OHILA: Not quite no-one.

[Cloisters]

DOCTOR: This way, I'm fairly sure. According to the stories, there's a secret way out. If you find it, the Sliders let you go.
DALEK: Exterminate!
(Liquid is running down its eyestalk. Dalek voice provided as usual by Nicholas Briggs, co-executive producer of Big Finish Productions, makers of real Who audio stories.)
DOCTOR: It's okay. It's okay, look at it.
DALEK: Exterminate me.
CLARA: Is it trapped?
DOCTOR: Don't worry, it's been neutralised. Those aren't vines. In your terms, they're fibre-optic cables, they're alive and growing. We're inside the biggest database in history. Sometimes, people are stupid enough to break in.
CLARA: And?
DOCTOR: It's a database. They get filed.
DALEK: (slowly) Exterminate me.
DOCTOR: Probably a leftover from the Cloister Wars. There's nothing we can do. Come on.
DALEK: (pleading) Exterminate me. Exterminate me.
(Further along Clara sees a Weeping Angel entangled in cables. She walks past and it vanishes, then reappears in front of her. And another.)
DALEK [OC]: Exterminate me!
(She slips past, only have an arm grabbed by one of a pair of Cybus Cybermen. The Doctor pulls her free.)
DOCTOR: Keep away from them! The Matrix can use them as a defence. It means the secret exit must be close.
CLARA: What's to defend in a crypt?
DOCTOR: It's not just a crypt. More like a stone circuit board. This is the Matrix database.
(They arrive at an area with a glowing interlocking circles pattern on the floor without actually noticing. Clara stands in the middle of it.)
CLARA: Database? What do you mean, database?
(The Doctor realises where she's standing.)
DOCTOR: Oh.
CLARA: Oh?
DOCTOR: Oh.
CLARA: Oh?
(She looks down.)
CLARA: Oh.
(The Doctor starts clearing the dirt of eons with his foot.)
DOCTOR: Looks like the primary service hatch. Just have to work out the key.
DOCTOR: Oh.
DOCTOR: When Time Lords die, their minds are uploaded to a thing called the Matrix. This structure, it's like a living computer. It can predict the future, generate prophecies out of algorithms, ring the Cloister bells in the event of impending catastrophe. The Sliders, they're just like the guard dogs, the firewall. Projections from inside the Matrix itself. The dead, manning the battlements.
CLARA: Was I supposed to understand any of that?
DOCTOR: The Time Lords have got a big computer made of ghosts, in a crypt, guarded by more ghosts.
CLARA: Didn't hurt, did it?
DOCTOR: Tiny bit.
(He gets down on his hands and knees, running his fingers around the curved grooves..)
CLARA: Why would a computer need to protect itself from the people who made it?
DOCTOR: All computers do that in the end. You wait until the internet starts. Oh, that was a war!

[Extraction chamber]

GASTRON: They don't seem to be moving.
GENERAL: And they're by lift shaft seven. Keep monitoring.
(Ohila follows the now-lady General out.)

[Cloisters]

DOCTOR: A long time ago, there was a student at the Academy. He got in here, disappeared for four days. Showed up in a completely different part of the city. Said the Sliders talked to him, they showed him the secret passage out. And we just need the code.
(The Doctor gets out his notebook.)
CLARA: What, and the kid told you the secret?
DOCTOR: Ah, no, he didn't tell anyone anything. He went completely mad. Never right in the head again, so they say.
CLARA: Okay, that's encouraging.
DOCTOR: The last I heard, he stole the moon and the President's wife.
CLARA: Was she, er, Was she nice, the President's wife?
DOCTOR: Ah, well, that was a lie put about by the Shabogans. It was the President's daughter. I didn't steal the moon, I lost it.
CLARA: I'd know you anywhere.
DOCTOR: I was a completely different person in those days. Eccentric, a bit mad, rude to people.
CLARA: Look at me again.
DOCTOR: Sorry, what?
CLARA: In the eye. Look at me. Just do it.
DOCTOR: What? What is it?
CLARA: How long has it been for you since you last saw me?
DOCTOR: Oh, ffr, I'm not sure.
CLARA: How long?
DOCTOR: I was stuck on a place. They
CLARA: They what? Who? Who are we talking about?
DOCTOR: They wanted something from me. Information. It really doesn't matter.
CLARA: What happened to your coat? The velvety coat. I liked that one, it was it was very Doctor-y.
DOCTOR: I changed it.
CLARA: Why?
DOCTOR: Well, I can't be the Doctor all the time.
(The grooves make clicking noises as he presses on parts of them.)
DOCTOR: I think I've almost got it. I think this is it.
CLARA: Tell me what they did to you. Tell me what happened to the Doctor?

[Lift]

GENERAL: We're here.

[Extraction chamber]

GASTRON: It's pretty quiet.

[Lift]

GASTRON [OC]: He seems to be talking to her, like he's telling her a story. You might want to have a look.
(There are two guards with the General and Ohila.)
GENERAL: Open up, we're going in. We'll stick to the perimeter, no more than three paces from the lift. Do not enter the Cloisters.

[Cloisters]

DOCTOR: Twenty feet of pure diamond. Harder than diamond.
(The lift door opens.)
DOCTOR: But you break through anything, given time.
CLARA: How much time?
GENERAL: Miss Oswald.
CLARA: Stay back.
GENERAL: I'm sorry, but we have to find a way to extract you
CLARA: I said, stay back!
(The General and Ohila lower their eyes and take one step back.)
CLARA: The Hybrid, what is it? What's so important you would fight so long?
DOCTOR: It doesn't matter what the Hybrid is. It only matters that I convinced them that I knew. Otherwise they'd have kicked me out, I'd have had nothing left to bargain with.
CLARA: What were you bargaining for?
DOCTOR: What do you think? You. I had to find a way to save you. I knew it had to be the Time Lords. They cost you your life on Trap Street, Clara, and I was going to make them bring you back. I just had to hang on in there for a bit.
CLARA: How long?
DOCTOR: It was fine.
(Clara stands and turns around.)
CLARA: One question. And you will answer. How long was the Doctor trapped inside the confession dial?
OHILA: We think four and a half billion years.
GENERAL: He could have left any time he wanted. He just had to say what he knew. The dial would have released him.
(Clara turns back to the Doctor.)
CLARA: Four and a half billion years?
DOCTOR: If she says so.
(Clara drops to her knees.)
CLARA: No. Why would you even do that? I was dead! I was dead and gone. Why? Why would you even do that to yourself?
DOCTOR: I had a duty of care. Listen, I'm nearly through here. (burble, clang) If I'm right, there should be a service duct under here. We'll be able to get to the old workshops. They'll have Tardises there.
CLARA: Okay, listen. I have something I need to say.
DOCTOR: We do not have time.
CLARA: No, my time, my time is up. Doctor, between one heartbeat and the last is all the time I have. People like me and you, we should say things to one another. And I'm going to say them now.
(A brief interlude of showing off the CGI Capitol so we don't get to hear what she says, then Clara stands and walks over to the General and Ohila.)
CLARA: You're monsters. Here you are, hiding away at the end of Time. Do you even know why? Because you are hated. You are hated by everybody. But by nobody more than me.
OHILA: What did you say to him?
CLARA: Oh, nothing I'm going to tell you, or anybody else. Except maybe this one part. I said (metal moves in the background) Don't worry, Doctor. They'll all be looking at me.
(Light streams up from the open trap door.)
GENERAL: You need to tell us what the Doctor is going to do now.
CLARA: You really are thick, aren't you? The Doctor is back on Gallifrey. Took him four and half billion years to get here. What do you think he's going to do now?
(The sound of time engines wheezing.)
CLARA: Why, he's stealing a Tardis and running away. Bye!
(A bland columnar steel capsule materialises around Clara. The interior is classic first Doctor, right down to the console and time rotor. Wonderful!)

[Tardis]

CLARA: You were quick.
DOCTOR: Time machine. I backed up a bit.
OHILA [OC]: Doctor! Doctor, face me!

[Cloisters]

OHILA: Doctor, can you hear me?

[Tardis]

OHILA [on scanner]: Get out of that Tardis and face me, boy!
CLARA: Boy?
(The Doctor opens the doors and pokes his head out.)

[Cloisters]

OHILA: You have gone too far. You have broken every code you ever lived by.
DOCTOR: After all this time, after everything I've done, don't you think the universe owes me this?
OHILA: Owes you what? All you're doing is giving her hope.
DOCTOR: Since when is hope a bad thing?
OHILA: Hope is a terrible thing on the scaffold.
(The Doctor pulls his head back in, closes the door and the Tardis dematerialises. Ohila shakes her head.)
GENERAL: Where can he run?
OHILA: Where he always runs. Away. Just away.

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: What do you think of the new wheels?
CLARA: Basic.
DOCTOR: Classic! Look at the colour scheme.
CLARA: It's all white.
DOCTOR: Genius! (jolt) Check your heartbeat again. I think that you'll find you have one.
CLARA: Yeah?
DOCTOR: It should have restarted when we broke free of Gallifrey's time zone. You're alive! Now we just have to shake off the Time Lords. There's only one place we can do that. What do you say to lunch, followed by breakfast? Because we're time travellers and that's how we roll. Then cocktails with Moses. Then I'm going to invent a flying submarine. Why? Because no one ever has and it's annoying. And maybe we should use this Tardis to find my proper one. I need to change my shirt.
CLARA: Doctor, I still don't have a pulse.
DOCTOR: Oh, you just haven't found it yet. Try again.
CLARA: I know how to take my pulse. Look, I know how to do it. See, no pulse, right?
(The Doctor puts on his sunglasses and checks the back of her neck. Three zeros are still showing on the skin. He takes the glasses off and tosses them on the console)
CLARA: Is it still there? Don't lie to me.
DOCTOR: Er, maybe we just have to fly a little bit further, give it a bit more welly.
CLARA: They said, your lot, that if you saved me, Time would fracture. What does that mean?
DOCTOR: Oh, they're exaggerating. They exaggerate all the time. History will be fine. Time will heal. It always does.
CLARA: Always?
DOCTOR: Yeah. It'll sort itself out. It'll be all right. You'll have a heartbeat. Or don't you trust me any more?
CLARA: No, not when you're shouting. Where are we going?
DOCTOR: Nowhere in space, forward in time. We're going to the last hours of the universe. We're going long past where the Time Lords were hiding. Literally, to the end. They won't be able to track us there. We'll just be there for a minute. I just need to. I need to make an adjustment.
CLARA: To what?
DOCTOR: It's nothing, really. It's this.
CLARA: The neural block. Human compatible, that's what you said.
(The time rotor stops.)
DOCTOR: We don't have to stay here long. Er check your heartbeat again. Your timeline must have started by now. A pulse, yeah? You have a pulse, yes? Pulse? Let me do it.
CLARA: I am checking it properly!
DOCTOR: This should work. This has got to work.
CLARA: What if one last heartbeat is all I've got? What if Time isn't healing? What if the universe needs me to die?
DOCTOR: The universe is over! It doesn't have a say any more! We're standing on the last ember, the last fragment of everything that ever was. As of this moment, I'm answerable to no-one!
(Four knocks on the door.)
CLARA: How can there be anybody there?
(Four knocks again.)
DOCTOR: Four knocks. It's always four knocks.
(Clara goes towards the door.)
DOCTOR: No. This one I do alone.
CLARA: What's out there?
DOCTOR: Me.
(He opens the doors and leaves.)

[Cloisters]

(The Tardis door closes behind him. There is natural light here now because the rest of the Citadel is crumbling to dust.)
DOCTOR: I told you once, so long ago, that the universe would become a very small place when I'm angry with you. Small enough for you yet?
(Ashildr is sitting on one of two tall leather armchairs, by a small table with a chess set on it.)
DOCTOR: Hello, me.
ASHILDR: You don't seem surprised to see me.
DOCTOR: At the end of everything, we should expect the company of immortals, so I've been told.
ASHILDR: Even the other immortals are gone. It's just me.
DOCTOR: The one and only me. Finally, you earn the title, sitting here in a reality bubble at the end of Time itself. How are you sustaining it, by the way?
ASHILDR: Brilliantly. I've been watching the stars die. It was beautiful.
DOCTOR: No. It was sad.
ASHILDR: No, it was both. But that's not something you would understand, is it? You don't like endings. She died, Doctor. Clara died billions of years ago.
DOCTOR: You killed her.
ASHILDR: No.
DOCTOR: You let it happen.
ASHILDR: No, I didn't. Neither did you. She did. She died for who she was and who she loved. She fell where she stood. It was sad, and it was beautiful. And it is over. We have no right to change who she was.
DOCTOR: Ashildr
ASHILDR: Me.
DOCTOR: Me, go to hell. By my calculations, you've got about five minutes.
ASHILDR: You know why we run, Doctor?
DOCTOR: Because it's fun.
ASHILDR: Because we know summer can't last forever.
DOCTOR: Of course it can. Of course it can. You just have to steal a time machine.
ASHILDR: The Hybrid. Five minutes to hell. I think it's time to tell the truth.

[Tardis]

(Clara finally spots the scanner screen, and puts the sunglasses on.)
CLARA: Screen on.
ASHILDR [on scanner]: You were barely more than a child. You broke in here and the Wraiths spoke to you about the Hybrid. Why did that story make you so scared?
DOCTOR [on scanner]: I don't know. I don't remember it.

[Cloisters]

ASHILDR: Sometimes you do. It's always the way with things we'd rather forget. You remember now, though, don't you? Tell me, Doctor, who is the Hybrid? Who threatens all of Time and Space?
DOCTOR: Oh, but that's easy. That's very, very easy. The Hybrid is you.

[Tardis]

ASHILDR [on scanner]: I'm human, with a little bit of Mire inside me. The Hybrid is supposed to be half Time Lord, half Dalek.
DOCTOR [on scanner]: No, it isn't.

[Cloisters]

DOCTOR: The actual prophecy specifies only two warrior races. The Daleks and the Time Lords have made assumptions, of course. And they would. Humans and the Mire, both warrior races. It fits perfectly.
ASHILDR: It's an interesting theory.
DOCTOR: Do you have a better one?
ASHILDR: By your own reasoning, why couldn't the Hybrid be half Time Lord, half human? Tell me, Doctor, I've always wondered. You're a Time Lord, you're a high-born Gallifreyan. Why is it you spend so much time on Earth?
(Because in the Movie, the Master worked out that the Doctor's really half-human - on his mother's side.)
DOCTOR: That's your best theory? I'm the Hybrid? I ran away from Gallifrey because I was afraid of myself? That doesn't make any sense.
ASHILDR: It makes perfect sense, and you know it. Am I right? Is it true?
DOCTOR: Does it matter?
ASHILDR: No. Because I have a better theory.
DOCTOR: Really?
ASHILDR: What if the Hybrid wasn't one person, but two?
DOCTOR: Two?
ASHILDR: A dangerous combination of a passionate and powerful Time Lord and a young woman so very similar to him.

[Tardis]

ASHILDR [on scanner]: Companions who are willing to push each other to extremes.
DOCTOR [on scanner]: She's my friend. She's just my friend.
ASHILDR [on scanner]: How did you meet her?
CLARA: Missy!

[Cloisters]

DOCTOR: Missy.
ASHILDR: Missy. The Master. The lover of chaos, who wants you to love it, too. She's quite the matchmaker.
DOCTOR: Clara's my friend.
ASHILDR: I know. And you're willing to risk all of Time and Space because you miss her. One wonders what the pair of you will get up to next.
DOCTOR: Nothing. Nothing at all. I know I went too far. I get it. That's why I'm doing what I'm doing.
ASHILDR: And what would that be?
DOCTOR: I'm taking her back to Earth. Somewhere safe, somewhere out of the way. I'm going to wipe her memory of every last detail of me.

[Tardis]

DOCTOR [OC]: It'll be like our friendship never happened.
ASHILDR [OC]: That may not be what she wants.
DOCTOR [OC]: 'I've done it before. Usually, I do it telepathically, but this time, I've got something better.
(Clara picks up the neural block.)

[Cloisters]

DOCTOR: It's quite painless.
ASHILDR: Will you tell her what you're going to do?
DOCTOR: Of course.
ASHILDR: When?
DOCTOR: Now.

[Tardis]

(Clara activates the glasses again.)
CLARA: Screen off.
(Ashildr gestures you first to the Doctor, and they both go inside.)
DOCTOR: You okay?
CLARA: Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Just, you know, my pulse.
DOCTOR: Yeah, we'll fix that somehow. I promise. You remember Ashildr, of course.
CLARA: Yeah, sure.
DOCTOR: I thought you'd be more surprised to see her.
CLARA: I was watching. On the monitor.
(She picks up the glasses and moves away from the console. The Doctor picks up the neural block.)
CLARA: No. Doctor, whatever you're about to do, don't do it.
DOCTOR: It won't hurt, it'll be nothing. You'll just pass out for a moment.
CLARA: And then?
DOCTOR: When you wake, you'll be fine.
CLARA: But
DOCTOR: Clara, just listen to me.
CLARA: Just say it. Say it. Come on. Tell me.
DOCTOR: When you wake up, you will have forgotten me. You'll have forgotten we ever even met.
CLARA: And why would I want that?
DOCTOR: Because it's the only way. That stuff in your head, the image of me, they could use it to find you.
(Clara holds out the sunglasses.)
CLARA: I, er I used these.
DOCTOR: On what?
CLARA: That.
DOCTOR: What did you do?
CLARA: What do you think? Ashildr's right, you see? We're too alike.
DOCTOR: Tell me what you did.
CLARA: What else? What else do you think I did? I reversed the polarity. Push that button, Doctor, it will go off in your own face.
DOCTOR: You were trying to trick me?
CLARA: What were you doing to me?
DOCTOR: I'm trying to keep you safe.
CLARA: Why? Nobody's ever safe. I've never asked you for that, ever. These have been the best years of my life, and they are mine. Tomorrow is promised to no one, Doctor, but I insist upon my past. I am entitled to that. It's mine.
DOCTOR: Oh, Clara Oswald. What am I doing? You're right. You're always, always right.
CLARA: So what happens now? Hey? Me and you, what do we do now?
DOCTOR: I'm not sure you managed to reverse the polarity. I'm not even sure that you can. It'll do something to one of us. Better than flipping a coin.
CLARA: Doctor?
DOCTOR: You and me together. Look how far I went, for fear of losing you. This has to stop. One of us has to go.
(Clara gives him back his sunglasses, which he puts in his inside pocket.)
CLARA: You really don't know which?
DOCTOR: Let's find out. Let's do it like we've done everything else. Together.
(They both hold the neural block.)
CLARA: How about we just don't? Why don't we just fly away somewhere?
DOCTOR: Oh, that'd be great, wouldn't it?
CLARA: God, yeah.
DOCTOR: Good luck, Clara.
CLARA: Good luck, Doctor.
(They press the button together, and it whirrs for a few seconds.)
CLARA: So, what happens now?
DOCTOR: I suppose, we just, er, we just wait a minute, I suppose.
CLARA: And one of us, One of us will. I don't think I could ever forget you.
DOCTOR: Clara, I don't think you're ever going to have to.
(The Doctor drops the neural block and sways. He leans against the console.)
CLARA: No.
DOCTOR: Run like hell.
CLARA: What?
(The Doctor slumps to the floor.)
DOCTOR: Run like hell, because you always need to. Laugh at everything, because it's always funny.
CLARA: No. Stop it. You're saying goodbye. Don't say goodbye!
DOCTOR: Never be cruel and never be cowardly. And if you ever are, always make amends.
CLARA: Stop it! Stop this. Stop it!
DOCTOR: Never eat pears. They're too squishy and they always make your chin wet. That one's quite important. Write it down.
CLARA: I didn't mean to do this. I'm sorry.
DOCTOR: It's okay. It's okay. I went too far. I broke all my own rules. I became the Hybrid. This is right. I accept it.
CLARA: I can't. There has to be something I can do.
DOCTOR: Smile for me. Go on, Clara Oswald, one last time.
(Clara has tears streaming down her face.)
CLARA: How could I smile?
DOCTOR: It's okay. Don't you worry. I'll remember it.
(The Doctor passes out.)

[Nevada]

PLUMP MAN: Sir? Are you all right?
(The Doctor is lying on the ground with a rock for a pillow. An American in a blue baseball cap is looking down at him.)
DOCTOR: Where am I?
(He leaps up.)
DOCTOR: How did I get here?
PLUMP MAN: Clara asked me to look after you. She said you might be a bit upset.
DOCTOR: Clara?
PLUMP MAN: Yeah. She was just here.
(We now see that the plump man drives a bronze coloured sedan.)
PLUMP MAN: I don't know where she went.
DOCTOR: Clara? Clara who?

[Diner]

DOCTOR: When something goes missing, you can always recreate it by the hole it left. I know her name was Clara. I know we travelled together. I know that there was an Ice Warrior on a submarine and a mummy on the Orient Express. I know we sat together in the Cloisters and she told me something very important, but I have no idea what she said. Or what she looked like. Or how she talked. Or laughed. There's nothing there. Just nothing.
CLARA: Are you looking for her?
DOCTOR: I'm trying.
CLARA: She could be anyone, right? You don't know who you're looking for. I mean, she could be me, for all you know.
DOCTOR: There's one thing I know about her. Just one thing. If I met her again, I would absolutely know.
I think that we were here, you know? I think that we were here together once. I'm sure I'll remember. Over here.
(The tables by the wall.)
DOCTOR: Stupid Doctor. Amy and Rory. It was Amy and Rory.
CLARA: What about your Tardis, hey? Have you found that yet?
DOCTOR: No. Somebody's moved it from London. I'm still looking. But this diner. It wasn't always here, was it? It used to be on the other side of the hill.
CLARA: Well, maybe someone will find your Tardis for you.
(Clara comes out from behind the counter and heads for the door with Elvis painted on it - Rest room, Guys Dolls. The Doctor starts playing his guitar tune again, and she pauses.)
CLARA: What Clara told you in the Cloisters
DOCTOR: I don't remember a single thing about it.
CLARA: You said memories become stories when we forget them. Maybe some of them become songs.
(He turns away and continues playing.)
DOCTOR: That would be nice.
CLARA: Yeah, it would be, wouldn't it?
(She opens the door to reveal a Tardis console room, and goes inside. It dematerialises, leaving the Doctor standing alone in the Nevada desert. Alone except for the blue Police Telephone Box with artwork by Rigsy.)

[Tardis]

(Ashildr is studying a Gallifreyan instruction manual.)
ASHILDR: I don't think I've got the Chameleon circuit working. The outer shell might be stuck as an American Diner.
CLARA: Awesome.
ASHILDR: Still no pulse?
CLARA: Time isn't healing. I am still frozen.
ASHILDR: You know what that means?
CLARA: It means my death is a fixed event. The universe depends on it happening.
ASHILDR: I'm sorry.
CLARA: Why? Why does everybody think I am so scared? We all face the raven in the end. That is the deal. If I go back to Gallifrey, they can put me back, right? On Trap Street, the moment they took me out?
ASHILDR: Of course.
CLARA: Mind you, seeing as I'm not actually ageing, there's a tiny little bit of wiggle room, isn't there?
ASHILDR: Wiggle room?
CLARA: Wiggle room. Yeah, you know, wiggle room. We could, er, you know, stop off on the way.
(Clara sets coordinates.)
ASHILDR: Where are we going?
CLARA: Gallifrey. Like I said, Gallifrey. The long way round.
(The American Diner whizzes through the Vortex.)
(Meanwhile, back in Nevada, the Doctor is gazing at his old Tardis. Finally, he puts his hands on the doors and they open for him. The interior is empty, but once he enters it starts to power up. He puts down his guitar and goes up to the gallery, where a blackboard has Run, you clever boy, and be a Doctor written on it. He exchanges his black jacket for the lovely burgundy one. A sonic screwdriver materialises in its power socket, then flies across to where he catches it, Star Wars light sabre style, and tests it. Then he snaps his fingers and the doors close. The Doctor goes down the steps and sets the Tardis flying. As it dematerialises, all the paint is left behind, and the two Tardises cross paths in the Vortex.)

Mendorax Dellora
(human colony)
Christmas Day
5343

[Village]

(Two moons shine through wispy clouds in a night sky as we fly over a snow-covered landscape and a large red flying saucer, to a village, as an orchestra and choir gives us that excellent Christmas hymn by Charles Wesley to the tune by Felix Mendelssohn. In a street looking remarkably like Trap Street but with extra cheeriness and lights, the Tardis is being quietly covered with the falling snow, and has some icicles hanging from it. There is a notice fastened to the door - Carol Singers Will Be Criticised. A man in a red duffel coat and woolly bobble hat approaches the Mathiesa Boutique and turns left, looking at a piece of paper and muttering to himself.)
CHOIR [OC]:  Hark! The Herald Angels sing. Glory to the newborn king! Peace on earth and mercy mild. God and sinners reconciled. Joyful, all ye nations, rise. Join the triumph of the skies. 
NARDOLE: Nothing there.
(He turns around and sees the Tardis, then checks his piece of paper.)
NARDOLE: Ooo! This must be it.
(He goes up to the Tardis and knocks on the door. The Doctor answers it. He had two felt antlers sticking straight up on the top of his head.)
DOCTOR: Is there anything on my head?
NARDOLE: Er, well, yes.
DOCTOR: Describe it.
NARDOLE: Well, you've sort of got antlers.
DOCTOR: Antlers?
NARDOLE: Yes, antlers.
DOCTOR: Antlers! Hmm.
(The Doctor goes back inside, leaving the door slightly ajar.)
DOCTOR [OC]: You are a time-space machine. You're a vehicle! I've never asked you to cheer me up with hologrammatic antlers!
(The Tardis makes a brief engine noise.)
DOCTOR [OC]: Thank you.
(The Doctor returns, minus the antlers.)
DOCTOR: Can I help you?
NARDOLE: Yes. Are you the surgeon?
DOCTOR: Close enough. Why?
NARDOLE: Well, you know.
DOCTOR: I don't know.
NARDOLE: There's a medical emergency.
(Nardole turns and starts to walk away.)
DOCTOR: Will there be singing?
NARDOLE: No.
DOCTOR: Fine, then.
(The Doctor closes the Tardis door and follows Nardole.)
NARDOLE: We weren't sure where you'd come down.
DOCTOR: Sorry?
NARDOLE: In your capsule.
DOCTOR: I'm never sure. I don't like being sure about things. One minute you're sure, the next everybody turns into lizards and a piano falls on you.
NARDOLE: A piano?
DOCTOR: It's been a long day.
(They walk down the street, past all the lights and decorations. Another man carrying a medical bag comes out of a side street and speaks to a passing woman.)
SURGEON: Are you expecting a surgeon?
DOCTOR: So what's the medical emergency?
NARDOLE: Didn't you read the agreement?

[Outside the saucer]

(They have passed the white painted fence denoting the edge of the village.)
NARDOLE: There it is.
DOCTOR: What?
NARDOLE: There. That's it.
DOCTOR: That's what? Oh, the flying saucer. Is that new?
(A door in the saucer opens, back-lighting a figure in a white fur trimmed hooded red floor-length cloak, who walks forward down the ramp to meet them. Note - although this person's face is partially obscured by the hood, her voice is instantly recognisable to us.)
NARDOLE: Come on.
RIVER: Well, you took your time.
NARDOLE: (bowing) Sorry, ma'am. This is him. This is the surgeon.
DOCTOR: Hello.
RIVER: You don't look much like your pictures.
DOCTOR: Well, that's an ongoing problem for me.
RIVER: Doesn't look very impressive, does he? Nardole, what have you brought to my doorstep?
DOCTOR: I've had a haircut. This is my best suit.
RIVER: It's not even a suit.
DOCTOR: Do I know you?
RIVER: You most certainly do not.
(She throws back the hood. The Doctor smiles broadly.)
RIVER: And now that you've met me, you'll do your very best to forget me.
DOCTOR: River!
NARDOLE: Oi! Doctor Song to you. Sometimes Professor, but mainly Doctor.
RIVER: Don't use my name. Ever. How do you know me?
DOCTOR: Well, it's a tiny bit complicated. People usually need a flowchart.
RIVER: It doesn't matter. If either of you use my name again, I will remove your organs in alphabetical order. Any questions?
DOCTOR: Which alphabet? (grin fades) Sorry, you really didn't want these questions, did you?
RIVER: This way. We don't have a lot of time.
(She leads the way into the saucer.)
DOCTOR: What seems to be the problem?
RIVER: My husband.
DOCTOR: Your husband?
RIVER: Didn't you read my message? My husband, yes. My husband is dying.
(The Doctor stands still.)
NARDOLE: Something wrong?
DOCTOR: I think I'm going to need a bigger flowchart.

[Saucer chamber]

(Plainsong is being sung somewhere as River enters the main chamber.)
RIVER: Husband, I return to you.
(Cloaked figures start to draw swords from scabbards slung across their backs, then return them to their resting places.)
HYDROFLAX: Where is my queen?
RIVER: Never far from you, my love.
HYDROFLAX: Ah.
(Hydraulic servos move, and we see a small male head where the neck should be on a huge red armoured figure lying on a table.)
DOCTOR: No, wait. That's your husband?
RIVER: Listen, you are being watched by four billion people.
(There are screens recessed into the walls around the chamber.)
RIVER: You are surrounded by warrior monks with sentient laser swords, genetically engineered anger problems and not enough to do. Best just stay still and keep your hands by your side.
DOCTOR: No, wait. That's your husband?
RIVER: My husband, your patient. King Hydroflax.
DOCTOR: Yes, that's who you're married to? Not anybody else?
HYDROFLAX: My love, attend me, woman!
RIVER: I fly to you. Is there a problem?
DOCTOR: Right. So you don't recognise me, then?
RIVER: Why would I recognise you?
DOCTOR: Oh, no reason.
(River goes to Hydroflax and caresses his armour. Nardole stands next to the Doctor, who has crossed his arms.)
DOCTOR: I don't like him. Do you like him?
NARDOLE: Don't cross your arms.
DOCTOR: He's a lying down person. I don't like lying down people. It's so untidy.
NARDOLE: Keep your arms by your side, like she said.
RIVER: My one true love. The only husband I will ever have.
(The Doctor rolls his eyes and crosses his arms. Nardole nudges him and he drops them by his side again.)
RIVER: My time with you has been too short.
HYDROFLAX: You have given me days of adventure and many nights of passion.
DOCTOR: Oh, oh.
NARDOLE: Why do you keep crossing them?
DOCTOR: Because they cross, I've got cross arms.
HYDROFLAX: The end is near. I feel it.
RIVER: Forgive me, my lord. I have acted against your instructions.
HYDROFLAX: My love?
RIVER: If you die this day, this galaxy will drown any tears. Oh, look at them, your people! They watch and hope and pray. With so much at stake, I followed my heart. I disobeyed your orders and sent for the finest surgeon in the galaxy!
(The crowds on the screens cheer and applaud. The Doctor looks around, and River holds out her hand to him. Nardole chuckles and punches the Doctor lightly on the arm.)
DOCTOR: (sotto) This might be an alarming question in the circumstance, but you really do think I'm a surgeon, don't you?
NARDOLE: Oh.
DOCTOR: (sotto) Okay, calm down, keep it together. Don't make puddles.
RIVER: Surgeon, attend your patient.
(Nardole looks very worried, and whimpers.)
DOCTOR: (sotto) Any tiny hint of species he might be?
(Nardole whimpers I dunno.)
DOCTOR: (sotto) Okay, never mind. You just stay there. (to a monk next to them.) You're probably going to need a mop.
(The Doctor goes to Hydroflax's side.)
RIVER: Bow.
DOCTOR: Sorry, what?
RIVER: You are in the presence of his Infinite Majesty, King Hydroflax. You will bow.
DOCTOR: Oh, no. I'm sorry, Your Majesty, I can't do that.
(Nardole is seriously cacking himself now.)
RIVER: You what?
DOCTOR: It's my back.
RIVER: Your back?
DOCTOR: Yeah, my back's playing up. It simply refuses to carry the weight of an entirely pointless stratum of society who contribute nothing of worth to the world and crush the hopes and dreams of working people.
HYDROFLAX: Can you save me, Surgeon?
DOCTOR: Well, that depends upon what's wrong with you.
RIVER: There's something in his brain.
DOCTOR: You could have fooled me.
(Hydroflax gets angry.)
DOCTOR: Oh, oh, sorry.
(River placates Hydroflax by massaging his face vigorously.)
DOCTOR: Sorry, just gallows humour. Probably the wrong word.
NARDOLE: Yeah, I would say it is.
RIVER: My love, you must rest. The surgeon and I will discuss the procedure. Prepare, master of my life, to live anew.
(She plants a long sloppy kiss on Hydroflax's forehead.)
RIVER: Patience be with you all. Our King will rise again!
NARDOLE + CROWDS: Our King will rise again.
(River gestures to the Doctor to follow her out of the chamber.)
CROWDS: Our King will rise again! Hydroflax! Hydroflax!

[Saucer room]

(The doors close.)
DOCTOR: All right, enough of this. The joke's over.
RIVER: What joke?
DOCTOR: Look at me.
RIVER: Why?
DOCTOR: I'm the Doctor.
RIVER: You'd better be, you've got an operation to perform.
(She activates a massive hologram of Hydroflax's head.)
RIVER: Here's the entry wound, just below the hairline. And there's the projectile. It should have killed him straight off, but he's very strong.
DOCTOR: It's not a bullet.
RIVER: It's a diamond.
DOCTOR: How did it get in there?
RIVER: At speed.
(The Doctor puts on his sonic sunglasses.)
RIVER: Do you recognise it?
DOCTOR: No!
RIVER: Yes.
DOCTOR: The Halassi Androvar.
RIVER: The very same. Hydroflax was leading a raid on the Halassi vaults. In the ensuing fire-fight, the whole thing blew up in his face, with the result that he now has the most valuable diamond in the universe lodged three inches inside his enormous head.
(The Doctor reaches into the hologram and manipulates the holo-diamond.)
RIVER: So, can you remove it?
DOCTOR: It's very small. It might be difficult to manoeuvre it.
RIVER: Not the diamond. His head.
DOCTOR: His head?
(The Doctor removes his sunglasses and stares at River.)
RIVER: Yes. I think it would be easier just to remove the whole thing, don't you?
DOCTOR: Wouldn't that kill him?
RIVER: You're the medical expert, but I'd say so, yes.
DOCTOR: Your husband?
RIVER: Sort of.
DOCTOR: Sort of?
RIVER: I basically married the diamond. The Halassi want their diamond back, so they came to me.
DOCTOR: Why?
RIVER: I'm an archaeologist.
DOCTOR: Slash murderer slash thief.
RIVER: An archaeologist is just a thief. With patience.
(She empties a zippered bag, throwing out a red fez and a bronze plate.)
RIVER: Never had much of that. It'll fit in here, don't you think? I've checked it for leaks.
DOCTOR: Is this what you're like when I'm not
RIVER: Not what?
DOCTOR: You're talking about murdering someone.
RIVER: No, I'm not. I'm actually murdering someone. Cheer up, get a saw, I'll kill the lights, you kill the patient. I employed you. You agreed to this. Do you not know who that man is? King Hydroflax, the butcher of the Bone Meadows, who ends his battles by eating his enemies, dead or alive. The murder of a creature like that wouldn't weigh heavily on my conscience, even if I had one. What's that face? Are you thinking? Stop it. You're a man, it looks weird.
DOCTOR: I need more information.
RIVER: For what?
DOCTOR: For my diagnosis.
RIVER: He's dying. We're about to steal his head and scoop out his brains. Aren't we over-thinking?
DOCTOR: I'll be the judge of that. I'm the Doctor.
RIVER: You know who you remind me of?
DOCTOR: Yes, probably a chap with a big
RIVER: My second wife.
(The hologram of his head is replaced by the entire actual Hydroflax. The monks with him all draw their swords.)
RIVER: Darling! You're up and about!
HYDROFLAX: False wife!
RIVER: How much better you're looking!
HYDROFLAX: You plan to take my head.
RIVER: Never crossed my mind. Is this your bag?
(She gives the bag to the Doctor.)
HYDROFLAX: Perhaps you should have just asked.
(Hydroflax's three-fingered right hand turns his head to the side then pulls it off its attachment and lowers it onto the table, then the body stomps two paces back.)
RIVER: Well! I wondered why we didn't share a bathroom.
DOCTOR: You married a cyborg and you didn't even know it.
HYDROFLAX: I'll have you flogged and flayed and burnt. I will crush every last remnant of you from this universe.
RIVER: How dare you! I'm your wife.
HYDROFLAX: You planned to murder me!
RIVER: Don't change the subject.
HYDROFLAX: Why are you doing this? Who are you?
RIVER: I'm Professor River Song. You have an ancient artefact of great value to good people, and whatever it takes, I'm going to bring it home to them. You have stolen so much from so many, King Hydroflax, and I'm the woman who's going to steal it all back.
HYDROFLAX: What are you?!
RIVER: I'm an archaeologist. Look! I've got a trowel.
(She pulls a trowel from her tool belt. It whirs as she uses it to zap the monk's swords, then attack Hydroflax's body.)
RIVER: Ha, ha, ha!
(The Doctor picks up Hydroflax's head.)
DOCTOR: Do not harm her! If you know what's good for you, do not lay a finger on that woman.
HYDROFLAX: Ignore him. Attack!
(River keeps using her sonic trowel on the cyborg while the Doctor opens the garbage disposal chute.)
DOCTOR: Garbage disposal, right? Get ready to say whee!
HYDROFLAX: Put me down.
DOCTOR: Back off from River Song. Give the order now. Get yourself under control.
HYDROFLAX: Do not attack the female.
(River runs to the Doctor's side, grabbing the bag, and points her trowel at Hydroflax's head.)
RIVER: Nobody move, or the head gets it.
DOCTOR: Do you really have a shooty trowel?
RIVER: It's sonic.
DOCTOR: Sonic trowel. You realise how ridiculous that sounds?
HYDROFLAX: Their threats are empty. Destroy them!
(Hydroflax's body speaks. Lights flash on its torso as it does.)
CYBORG: Negative. Seventy eight percent chance of significant tissue damage.
HYDROFLAX: Do as you're told!
CYBORG: Decision overruled. Recommendation, chill.
DOCTOR: Look at that, your body's got a mind of its own.
RIVER: More like an onboard computer for the cybernetic component.
DOCTOR: Plus in-built flash drive and vernacular friendly interface.
RIVER: Cyber co-pilot.
DOCTOR: Mobile life support.
RIVER: Sexy.
DOCTOR: It's not sexy.
RIVER: Absolutely sexy.
DOCTOR: Why is everything sexy now?
RIVER: Speaking of which.
(She uses her wrist comms.)
RIVER: Ramone, prep for emergency extraction. Two to go.
RAMONE [OC]: Standing by for teleport.
RIVER: Put it in the bag.
DOCTOR: Sorry?
RIVER: The head. Put it in the bag.
HYDROFLAX: Do not put me in the bag.
RIVER: Quickly, do it. Ramone, twenty seconds to jump.
HYDROFLAX: I will not be placed into a bag!
DOCTOR: Stop shouting a minute if you want to go face-up.
(The Doctor puts Hydroflax into the bag.)
HYDROFLAX: You will be crushed! You will be destroyed! You will beg my infinite mercy!
RIVER: Oh, zip it!
(The Doctor zips up the bag.)
RIVER: Try to follow me and I'll put him in a blender. Ramone, now.
(The Doctor, River and the bag are teleported away.)
CYBORG: They will be tracked. They will be found.

[Mendorax Dellora]

(The Doctor and River's feet are two feet or so off the ground when they materialise, and fall.)
BOTH: Argh! Oh!
RIVER: Ramone! Just once, can you get the height right?
RAMONE [OC]: Sorry, Professor.
HYDROFLAX [in bag] : When I escape, I will bring terror to you and your family. There is no escape from the
RIVER: Home in on my signal. Get a shift on. Can you locate the Damsel?
RAMONE [OC]: I'm on it. The capsule is really close.
(The Doctor is lying in the snow, laughing.)
RIVER: Is something funny?
HYDROFLAX [in bag]: Who dares laugh at Hydroflax? You shall be crushed! You shall scream in fear! Let me out of this bag!
RIVER: This is a serious mission in a critical phase. There is nothing to laugh about here.
DOCTOR: We're being threatened by a bag! By a head in a bag!
HYDROFLAX [in bag]: I shall make dust of you. My enemies are meat for the devouring!
DOCTOR: I can't approve of any of this, you know, but I haven't laughed in a long time.
RIVER: Well, good for you.
HYDROFLAX [in bag]: Prepare to die in agony and submit to my supremacy! Unzip this bag!
(River joins in with the Doctor's laughter.)
DOCTOR: You know, don't you?
RIVER: Know what?
DOCTOR: Stop pretending. You know who I am.
RIVER: Who are you?
DOCTOR: You know who I am. It's, it's, it's me.
RIVER: Great. Who are you?
(A dark haired man with a short beard comes running up.)
RAMONE: Professor Song! Sorry, Professor. Sorry about the height thing.
RIVER: Prove it.
(River kisses Ramone long and hard.)
DOCTOR: Urgh! Doesn't it get dull after a while? As an activity, it's not hugely varied, is it?
RIVER: I'm so sorry. This is my husband, Ramone.
DOCTOR: Another one? Are you going to kill him, too?
RAMONE: We're not actually married.
RIVER: Ah, we are, in fact. I wiped it from your memory.
RAMONE: Why?
RIVER: Well, you were being annoying. So, the Damsel. Do we have a fix?
RAMONE: Found the capsule just over in the village, but I can't locate Damsel. I've looked everywhere.
DOCTOR: Who's Damsel?
RIVER: Have you been thorough? It's not easy, you know. He does have twelve faces.
(Ramone takes out a wallet and a sheaf photographs drops down. The Doctor looks down them.)
RAMONE: None of these men are here. Are you sure it's one of these?
(The Doctor looks down the photographs from Hartnell to McCoy and smiles.)
RIVER: Yes! He only has these twelve faces. He'll be around here somewhere. This is the closest intersection with the Doctor's timeline.
(Then carries on down past McGann, Hurt, Eccleston, Tennant and Smith, and turns over the last one. No more photographs.)
RIVER: That's why I crashed Hydroflax's ship here.
DOCTOR: Damsel.
RAMONE: Codename, Damsel in Distress. Apparently, he needs a lot of rescuing.
DOCTOR: What if he has a face that you don't know about yet?
RIVER: He has limits. Well, then, let's go find him.

[Saucer room]

(Hydroflax's cybernetic body is interrogating poor Nardole.)
CYBORG: You are in league with the former Queen.
NARDOLE: She employed me! I didn't really know anything.
CYBORG: You have information.
NARDOLE: Oh, hardly anything, really. A tiny bit.
CYBORG: You will give this information to us.
NARDOLE: Oh, absolutely, Course I will.
CYBORG: We will take the information.
NARDOLE: Anything you like. I'll even write it down for you.
CYBORG: That will not be necessary. You will be uploaded. We apologise for the inconvenience.
NARDOLE: Uploaded? How?
CYBORG: Recommendation.
(A wicked curved blade pops out of its hand.)
CYBORG: Hold still.
NARDOLE: Ooooo!

[Outside the saucer]

(Nardole's head is now between the Cyborg's massive shoulders where Hydroflax's used to be.as the cyborg stomps out of the saucer.)
NARDOLE: No, this is no good. I don't like this.
CYBORG: Your cooperation is appreciated.
NARDOLE: I never agreed! No, this is unfair.
CYBORG: Pursuit now commences.
NARDOLE: This is too tall! I'm afraid of heights.
CYBORG: Recommendation, close your eyes.
(Nardole whimpers as stumpy metal wings are spread and rockets ignite under the Cyborg's armpits. Very Buzz Lightyear. It zooms off into the sky.)
NARDOLE: Argh!

[Village]

(Ramone and River are walking together along the street, with the Doctor bringing up the rear carrying the zipped bag.)
RAMONE: What if we can't find him? We need to get you off-world now.
DOCTOR: Off-world. People never say that. (laughs) Are you new?
RIVER: We can't hang around waiting. He could be ages.
DOCTOR: Yes, he's probably off rebuilding a civilisation or defeating giant robot fish
(They arrive at the Tardis.)
RIVER: We'll just have to steal it.
DOCTOR: From the ninth dimension. Sorry, what?
RAMONE: The hopper is really close. We would be out of here in less than ten minutes.
RIVER: I need time travel. I need this Tardis.
DOCTOR: I'm sorry. The word steal. Somebody said steal.
RIVER: Yes. We're going to steal this box. Hush, you wouldn't understand.
DOCTOR: You can't.
RIVER: Why can't I?
DOCTOR: You can't just steal a Ta. A box.
RIVER: Why not?
DOCTOR: Look, it says Police.
RIVER: I have a key.
(River produces a Yale type key and opens the Tardis door.)
DOCTOR: Okay. This er Damsel person. He sounds, he sounds pretty dangerous. Ish.
RIVER: It's a time machine. I can take it, do whatever I want for as long as I like and pop it back a second later. He'll never know it was gone.
DOCTOR: Yes, he will.
RIVER: How?
DOCTOR: He'll just know.
RIVER: Well, he's never noticed before.
DOCTOR: Maybe he'll notice now.
(River bursts out laughing.)
RIVER: I'll see you on Temple Beach. (kisses Ramone) I've already picked out your swimwear.
RAMONE: Okay, but be careful.
RIVER: Absolutely not. You, with me. Bring the head.
(River goes inside the Tardis.)
RAMONE: Please, look after her for me.
(Ramone starts to walk away, then stops. River pops her head out of the Tardis.)
RIVER: Oh, before you come in, you'd better prepare yourself for a shock. It's not as snug as it looks.
(She goes back inside.)
DOCTOR: Finally.
RAMONE: Finally?
DOCTOR: It's my go.

[Tardis]

DOCTOR: Oh. My, God! Oh, it's bigger!
RIVER: Well, yes.
DOCTOR: On the inside,
RIVER: We need to concentrate.
DOCTOR: Than it is
RIVER: I know where you're going with this, but I need you to calm down.
DOCTOR: On the outside!
RIVER: You've certainly grasped the essentials.
DOCTOR: My entire understanding of physical space has been transformed! Three-dimensional Euclidean geometry has been torn up, thrown in the air and snogged to death! My grasp of the universal constants of physical reality has been changed forever.
(River has gone down the stairs.)
DOCTOR: Sorry. I've always wanted to see that done properly.
(River opens a roundel to reveal a drinks cabinet.)
RIVER: Would you like a drink? Aldebaran brandy. Help yourself, but don't tell Dad.
(Beeping.)
RIVER: What's that noise?
(The Doctor checks Hydroflax's head in the bag. The eyes are shut.)
DOCTOR: It seems to have powered down, conserving batteries. It's an in-built life-support system. I'm not sure what powers it, but
RIVER: I really don't care. What's that noise?
DOCTOR: I don't know. A signal? Distress call?
RIVER: Homing beacon.
DOCTOR: Possibly.
RIVER: So the rest of him is coming?
DOCTOR: He must be very cross. He's lost his head.
RIVER: Time we were off, then.
(River activates the time engines, which briefly judder then make sick noises.)
DOCTOR: You're doing it wrong.
RIVER: I am certainly not.
DOCTOR: Not those levers.
RIVER: Hush.
DOCTOR: You probably want to press that button.
RIVER: Why? That evacuates the waste tank on deck seven.
DOCTOR: Does it?
RIVER: What is wrong with you?
DOCTOR: Better avoid deck seven then.
RIVER: Something's interfering with the engines, which is technically not possible.
DOCTOR: Maybe.
RIVER: How would you know?
DOCTOR: Maybe the engines are interfering with themselves. Wild theory, but what if this machine had certain safeguards. For instance, maybe it can't take off when a life form registers as being both inside and outside at the same time?
RIVER: Head and body.
DOCTOR: Which would mean, and again, I'm just, I'm just wildly theorising here, that's the door would not engage properly.
RIVER: Of course. It can't seal the real-time envelope.
DOCTOR: Hence it can't take off. Not when someone is in and out at the same time. I mean, that just wouldn't be good manners, would it?
RIVER: You're very quick.
DOCTOR: Yes. For a Doctor.
RIVER: Yes.
DOCTOR: Seriously?

[Village]

(Ramone is walking along the narrow Elizabethan themed street.)
NARDOLE [OC]: Hello? Hello, is that you?
RAMONE: Nardole, is that you?
NARDOLE [OC]: It's me, yes. Please, you've got to help me.
RAMONE: What's wrong? Where are you?
NARDOLE [OC]: In the alleyway. Can't you see me? Come a bit closer.
RAMONE: What are you doing there?
NARDOLE [OC]: Help me.
(Ramone switches on his torch and searches for Nardole.)
RAMONE: Are you injured?
NARDOLE: Well, er yes.
(His torch finally lights up the Cyborg, which is pointing a gun at Nardole's head on its shoulders.)
NARDOLE: Sorry! So sorry. It made me!
RAMONE: Nardole, why are you pointing a gun at your own head?
NARDOLE: It's not my head! Well, it is my head, but it's not my gun.
RAMONE: What happened to you?
NARDOLE: Please, just do as it says.

[Tardis]

(The Doctor takes Hydroflax's head from the bag.)
DOCTOR: It's signalling. We have to assume the body is homing in on this.
RIVER: So, how do we stop it?
DOCTOR: Well, we could chop its head off. Oh, look.
RIVER: Does sarcasm help?
DOCTOR: Wouldn't it be a great universe if it did?
RIVER: So, summing up. It's coming, we can't take off, we can't seal the doors.
DOCTOR: Yep.
RIVER: So we just kill the head, right?
DOCTOR: You can't shoot the head in the face!
RIVER: Why not?
(Hydroflax opens his eyes.)
HYDROFLAX: Argh!
(The Doctor drops him, face down.)
DOCTOR: Go on, then, tell him to put his hands up.
HYDROFLAX: Do not fire if you value your lives.
DOCTOR: Why, what are you going to do?
HYDROFLAX: Kill me, and my body will burn.
DOCTOR: Burn what?
HYDROFLAX: This world!

[Village]

CYBORG: Inquiry. Are you acquainted with the criminal River Song?
NARDOLE: That wasn't me, that was him!
CYBORG: Repeat, are you acquainted with the criminal River Song?
NARDOLE: Please, just answer it.
RAMONE: Yes.
CYBORG: You will take River Song a message.
RAMONE: What message?

[Tardis]

(The head is on the console, and grinning.)
RIVER: Suppose we believe you. How?
HYDROFLAX: My body contains a split quantum actualiser.
DOCTOR: A perpetually stabilised black hole. That's your power source.
RIVER: What sort of medical school did you go to?
DOCTOR: A really good one for doctors.
HYDROFLAX: More than a power source. If necessary, a bomb.
DOCTOR: So you could wipe out this solar system.
HYDROFLAX: It wouldn't be the first.
RIVER: It would be your last.
HYDROFLAX: A fitting end for the glory of Hydroflax.
DOCTOR: So, why haven't you threatened this before?
HYDROFLAX: A king does not endanger his people for no reason.
DOCTOR: You're endangering them now.
HYDROFLAX: I'm cross.
(Banging on the Tardis door.)
RAMONE [OC]: Doctor Song, are you there? I have a message for you.
RIVER: Ramone! Get in here!
(The Cyborg kicks the doors open.)
RIVER: Ah!
(Ramone's head is on the Cyborg now.)
RAMONE: You're going to die!
(It stomps inside and grabs River, lifting her off the floor.)
HYDROFLAX: Kill her.
RAMONE: No!
DOCTOR: Put her down.
HYDROFLAX: Kill her now!
CYBORG: Death initiating.
RAMONE: I'm so sorry.
(The Doctor dodge past the Cyborg and closes the Tardis doors. The time engines start and the Tardis shakes a lot. The Cyborg drops River.)
RAMONE: I'm sorry!
HYDROFLAX: Stop them! Stop them!
DOCTOR: Where are we going?
RIVER: Get the hell out!
HYDROFLAX: Stop them!
CYBORG: Death initiating.
DOCTOR: You set the coordinates. Where for?
RIVER: Just get the damn head!
HYDROFLAX: Kill them! Destroy them!
(River grabs the zip bag.)
HYDROFLAX: Kill them!
RIVER: Here.
(And throws it to the Doctor, who scoops Hydroflax into it and throws it back to River.)
RIVER: With me.
(She runs out of the Tardis, which has materialised in -)

[Baggage hold]

DOCTOR: Where are we?
RIVER: This way, come on.
DOCTOR: What about the box? Stop holding my hand, people don't do that to me.
RIVER: Hush now.
DOCTOR: Don't hush me. I'm not a hushing person.

[Reception area]

(A marble floored place with aliens in dinner jackets and posh frocks. Two long staircases run up the outer hull to the upper decks. River turns and closes the doors behind them.)
COMPUTER: We are currently cruising at warp factor twelve. Traversing the fourth galaxy of our seven galaxy cruise. Next is the Andromeda galaxy. Supernova approaching now to starboard.
(The big display on one wall says Harmony & Redemption 07:08:32:17. You are here - Super Nova Gamma Eridani. An upright biped with blue scales and a pair of catfish-like barbels walks up to them.)
FLEMMING: Ah, Doctor Song. Your table is ready.
RIVER: Flemming! How are the twins?
FLEMMING: Still digesting their mother, thank you for asking.
RIVER: I'm sure it was a lovely ceremony.
FLEMMING: Oh, there were tears. And just a hint of screaming.
(They both laugh.)
RIVER: Er, Flemming, I wonder, could you deadlock seal the baggage hold for me?
FLEMMING: It's a little irregular. The other passengers might want access.
RIVER: Do you remember that time I was transporting dragon eggs?
FLEMMING: Consider it done.
(The light by the door lock turns from green to red. Clunk.)
FLEMMING: Is the gentleman here for dinner?
DOCTOR: Yes, he is.
FLEMMING: Excellent! I'll have the chef prepare him immediately.
DOCTOR: No, you won't.
RIVER: Er, he will in fact be joining me to eat.
FLEMMING: I was about to suggest that force-feeding might be required. This way. Oh, may I take your bag?
RIVER: Oh, no, no, no, no. That's fine, thanks.
(Muffled annoyed shouting from the bag.)
DOCTOR: Sorry. It was my stomach. I have an irritable bowel.
HYDROFLAX [in bag]: My revenge will be merciless! I will rip you open and devour you!
DOCTOR: It's having a day.
HYDROFLAX [in bag]: You cannot escape!
FLEMMING: This way.
HYDROFLAX [in bag]: Your actions will not go unpunished!
RIVER: Here.
(She throws the bag to the Doctor.)
HYDROFLAX [in bag]: Ow!
RIVER: I don't suppose you mind if I freshen up.
(She squirts a spray at her head, and golden energy pins up her hair, then transforms her clothes into amnevening dress with a golden sequinned bodice.)
RIVER: Not bad for two hundred, eh?
DOCTOR: Two hundred?
RIVER: I have an augmented lifespan. Long story.

[Dining room]

DOCTOR: So, what's the occasion?
RIVER: I've got the diamond. Now it's time to sell it.
DOCTOR: I thought you were returning it to the Halassi?
RIVER: Tell me, were you born boring, or did you have to work at it?
DOCTOR: Where did you find a buyer?
RIVER: Look around you. The starship Harmony And Redemption, minimum ticket price one billion credits, plus the provable murder of multiple innocent life forms. Suites are reserved for planet-burners.
(She takes a drink from a passing waiter.)
RIVER: Thank you. Even the staff are required to have a verifiable history of indiscriminate slaughter. This is where genocide comes to kick back and relax. Do try the fish.

[Reception area]

(Meanwhile, something is hammering at the baggage room door. An alien of the same species as Flemming runs up.)
CONCIERGE: Mister Flemming, there's an issue.

[Dining room]

(River is reading something.)
RIVER: Why are you frowning?
DOCTOR: How did you know?
RIVER: It's audible.
DOCTOR: Deadlock seals can be broken.
RIVER: -By geniuses. Hydroflax has a brain the size of a pea and it's currently under the table.
(She kicks the bag.)
RIVER: He's gone back to sleep, I think.
DOCTOR: You married him, though.
RIVER: I told you, I married the diamond.
DOCTOR: How?
RIVER: I posed as his nurse. Took me a week.
DOCTOR: To fall in love?
(We now see River is holding her Tardis-styled Diary, first seen in Silence in the Library.)
RIVER: It's the easiest lie you can tell a man. They'll automatically believe any story they're the hero of.
DOCTOR: River, there's er, there's something I should probably tell you.
WAITRESS: (a humanoid) Doctor Song, your guest has docked. He should be with you in a very few minutes.
RIVER: Thank you. Whenever he's ready.
WAITRESS: Of course.
DOCTOR: What's the book?
RIVER: Oh, it's my diary. (channelling Oscar Wilde) One should always have something sensational to read on a spaceship.
DOCTOR: Is it sad?
RIVER: Why would a diary be sad?
DOCTOR: I don't know. It's just that you look sad.
RIVER: It's nearly full.
DOCTOR: So?
RIVER: The man who gave me this was the sort of man who'd know exactly how long a diary you were going to need.
DOCTOR: He sounds awful.
RIVER: I suppose he is. I've never really thought about it.
(She puts the diary back in her clutch purse.)
DOCTOR: Not somebody special then?
RIVER: No. But terribly useful every now and then.

[Security office]

RAMONE [on screen]: Please! I just need you to get me out of here.
CONCIERGE: He's in the main hold, sir, but you've deadlocked it.
FLEMMING: If you don't mind be observing, sir, you do seem a little nervous. Is someone threatening you?
RAMONE [on screen]: I'm the only one here.
CONCIERGE: Confirmed, sir. There's only one reading in the hold.
FLEMMING: I'm on my way.
CONCIERGE: Be careful, sir.
FLEMMING: Don't worry, I'll just stick my head round the door.

[Dining room]

DOCTOR: So, who is this buyer?
RIVER: No idea, he just responded to the advert.
(A shadow falls across their table. It is a bald man with a diagonal scar running around his face from the back of his skull, round across the right temple to below his left cheek bone. His voice is very hoarse.)
SCRATCH: Which of you is Song?
DOCTOR: Who wants to know?
SCRATCH: I am Scratch.
RIVER: Don't need your name. Are you empowered to purchase?
SCRATCH: I represent the Shoal of the Winter Harmony.
RIVER: Don't care. Don't want to know. I'll need immediate payment. Can you do that?
DOCTOR: And could you either sit down or fetch us the wine list or something?
(Scratch sits.)
SCRATCH: You have the diamond?
RIVER: Of course I have the diamond. Show me the money.
(Scratch runs his finger along his scar and something unlocks. Then he pulls his head open with squelching sounds.)
DOCTOR: Just a thought, you probably shouldn't do that in a restaurant.
(Scratch removes a metal globe from the grey contents of his skull, and places it in the napkin River holds out, thin strands of gunk still attached to it. He closes up his head again.)
SCRATCH: Once instructed, this will transfer the necessary funds to whatever account you choose.
RIVER: Thank you.
SCRATCH: The diamond.
(River puts the bag on the table.)
RIVER: You're going to have to dig for it a bit, but somehow I don't think that's going to be a problem for you.
(Scratch stands.)
SCRATCH: Is this a deception?
RIVER: No. The diamond is in there. This is a public place, there won't be any tricks.
SCRATCH: This is not a public place.
(The other diners turn. They are the same species as Scratch.)
DOCTOR: Block booking. That's clever.
RIVER: You needn't have bothered. I've brought what you want. Please do assume that I have also taken precautions, and don't do anything that might make me cross and kill you.
SCRATCH: Statement accepted. The diamond is here?
(The other diners all hiss.)
RIVER: The payment, then.
(River hands the globe to Scratch, who opens it and taps various illuminated buttons.)
SCRATCH: One hundred billion credits, as we agreed.
(He hands the globe back to River, who also taps buttons.)
SCRATCH: This accesses all the banks in the galaxy.
RIVER: Thank you. Here you go, then. You may need to use a spoon or knitting needle or something.
SCRATCH: Be it known, we do not do this for ourselves.
RIVER: I really don't care.
SCRATCH: We do it in honour of our distant and loving King, who once visited our world in blood and joy.
RIVER: Well, isn't that lovely?
(She starts to unzip the bag.)
SCRATCH: We honour thee, we prostrate ourselves in your name, Hydroflax.
ALL: Hydroflax!
SCRATCH: For love of thee, we do this thing today. Hydroflax.
(The other diners stand and chant.)
DINERS: Hydroflax! Hydroflax! Hydroflax! Hydroflax!
(River zips up the bag again.)
SCRATCH: Give it. Give us the treasure.
DINERS: Hydroflax! Hydroflax! Hydroflax!
SCRATCH: What is wrong?
DOCTOR: Er, well, er. Awkward.

[Baggage area]

FLEMMING: I beg of you, not my head!
CYBORG: Information is required. You know of River Song, wife of Hydroflax?
FLEMMING: I do. I know River Song of old. And if you spare me, I'll tell you who she's really married to.
CYBORG: Explain.
FLEMMING: You need a head. I can get you a head fit for a king.

[Dining room]

SCRATCH: Why do you delay? We have paid, we will receive.
(The Doctor stands and takes the bag.)
DOCTOR: Yes, you will. Of, by jingo, you will, yes, of course. But obviously, we have to, you know, er, check some
RIVER: Things.
DOCTOR: Things. There are things that have to be checked before I get it to you. If we don't check the thing, then the, the
SCRATCH: We will receive!
DOCTOR: Yes, you will receive, and here it is. Now, on its way, over this small distance.
SCRATCH: We will receive!
(The Doctor gives Scratch the bag.)
DOCTOR: Here you go. And you can have the bag as well.
RIVER: You know, it's been lovely, but er, we don't want to intrude on this special moment, so why don't we just leave you with the new baby?
SCRATCH: You will remain.
RIVER: Is that strictly necessary?
SCRATCH: I do not like surprises.
DOCTOR: Well, it's going to be a funny old day. Oh, boy.
(Scratch starts to unzip the bag.)
DOCTOR: You know what? I just can't stand idly by and let this continue.
(He snatches back the bag and stands on a chair.)
DOCTOR: Death has been done this day! Noble blood has been spilled, and our tears will surely follow. The sky shall crack, the ground shall heave, and even the rocks and the stones shall weep their rage. Behold! The head of Hydroflax!
(He gets down, takes the head out of the bag and shows it to the diners, who hiss.)
DOCTOR: Rest now, sweet prince. Walk amongst us nevermore. Shall we start the bidding at two hundred billion? I'm sorry, Professor Song, but we really couldn't keep this treasure from the truly devout.
RIVER: Oh, my apologies to the truly devout.
DOCTOR: And shall we find out who is the most truly devout?
SCRATCH: This is heresy!
RIVER: Two hundred over there.
(Pointing at a bewildered man at the back.)
DOCTOR: Two hundred fifty million by the sweet trolley.
(A woman chosen at random.)
SCRATCH: Silence! This is not our way.
DOCTOR: Well, it doesn't say much for your king if you can't put a price on his head. Let us see what the king himself has to say.
(The Doctor jabs a knife into the head's left ear. Hydroflax wakes up and screams. The diners all prostrate themselves)
RIVER: Quick!
(She grabs the Doctor's hand and they head for the door. Flemming blocks their exit.)
FLEMMING: Professor Song! Has the food disappointed you?
(Then the Cyborg stomps in, and the diners scream and flee. River pulls the Doctor out of the way, but they are grabbed by security men wearing black berets.)
HYDROFLAX: At last, I am whole again. Come to me, my body.
(The Cyborg stomps forward then stops and scans Hydroflax's head.)
HYDROFLAX: Well? Put me back.
CYBORG: Scan in progress.
HYDROFLAX: You don't need to scan me, just put me back.
CYBORG: Tissue deterioration now irreversible.
HYDROFLAX: Well, what are you going to do about that?
CYBORG: Additional, the projectile inside your brain continues to move. Prognosis, death in seven minutes.
HYDROFLAX: Well, I refuse. King Hydroflax does not accept death.
CYBORG: Orders requested.
HYDROFLAX: Whatever I need to survive, do it. Now.
CYBORG: Orders accepted. You need a new head.
HYDROFLAX: No! No. Not a new head!
CYBORG: Orders implementing.
HYDROFLAX: No. No!
(The body blasts the head into dry dark grey dust, revealing the diamond.)
RIVER: (to security man) I don't suppose you could fetch that over for me, could you?
FLEMMING: As I was saying, your Majesty. Well, your remaining Majesty.
(Flemming snatches River's diary.)
FLEMMING: If it's a new head you're after, this is the guide to the very best.
RIVER: Don't touch that. Give that back to me.
FLEMMING: The diary of River Song. The ultimate guide to the Time Lord known as the Doctor.
RIVER: Don't you dare touch that!
FLEMMING: Long live the King.
(A short time later, as the spaceship flies through some interstellar debris, Flemming is walking around whilst reading the diary.)
FLEMMING: The Pandorica Opens. Ooh, that sounds exciting. And goodness me, a picnic at Asgard. Some people really know how to snack, don't they?
RIVER: You should know I have a significant history of escaping.
FLEMMING: The Crash of the Byzantium. Didn't they make a movie of that?
RIVER: And when I do, I'm going to kill you.
FLEMMING: Oh, Jim the Fish! (laughs) Well, we all know Jim the Fish.
RIVER: And the longer you spend reading my diary, the longer I'm going to take.
FLEMMING: And you've just been to Manhattan. What planet is that?
RIVER: So do, please, keep going.
CYBORG: This is irrelevant.
SCRATCH: If I may intrude, your Majesty. The Doctor is a legendary being of remarkable power and an infinite number of faces. His head, I assure you, would be your crowning achievement.
(Flemming taps on the Cyborg's armour to get its attention back.)
FLEMMING: Besides which, many of us on this ship would be happy to see his career cut off, as it were, at the neck.
CYBORG: Proceed faster, or your head will be taken!
SCRATCH: I would give my head with gladness.
FLEMMING: This woman is the known consort of the Doctor.
CYBORG: Confirmation required. Uploading.
(Nardole's head rises out of the Cyborg's body, shaking and blinking in the light.)
NARDOLE: Ooo. Oh!
CYBORG: Is River Song the consort of the Time Lord known as the Doctor?
NARDOLE: Huh? I think so, yeah. Here, can I stay up for a bit? It's really very whiffy down there.
(Nardole's head is lowered.)
NARDOLE [OC]: Oh! Oh, it's awful!
FLEMMING: So, where is the Doctor now?
RIVER: I haven't the faintest idea.
FLEMMING: Is that credible?
RIVER: It's true.
FLEMMING: You're the woman he loves.
RIVER: No, I'm not.
FLEMMING: She's lying.
RIVER: The Doctor does not and has never loved me. I'm not lying.
(The Cyborg scans River.)
CYBORG: Confirmed. The life form is not lying.
FLEMMING: Impossible. This is a trick.
RIVER: No, it isn't.
FLEMMING: My information is correct. You are the woman who loves the Doctor.
RIVER: Yes, I am. I've never denied it. But whoever said he loved me back? He's the Doctor. He doesn't go around falling in love with people. And if you think he's anything that small or that ordinary, then you haven't the first idea of what you're dealing with. 
FLEMMING: Your Majesty, I assure you, she is the perfect bait. When this woman is in danger, the Doctor will always come.
RIVER: Oh, you are a moron. No, he won't.
FLEMMING: He's probably already here.
RIVER: No, he isn't. Of course he isn't!
FLEMMING: Possibly on this ship.
RIVER: Well, go on, scan it then. Go on, why don't you?
DOCTOR: River
RIVER: Two hearts, stupid clothes, you can't miss him.
DOCTOR: River.
RIVER: Go on, scan the whole parsec! He's not here. God knows where he is right now, but I promise you, he's doing whatever the hell he wants and not giving a damn about me! And I'm just fine with that.
DOCTOR: River
RIVER: When you love the Doctor, it's like loving the stars themselves. You don't expect a sunset to admire you back. And if I happen to find myself in danger, let me tell you, the Doctor is not stupid enough, or sentimental enough, and he is certainly not in love enough to find himself standing in it with me!
(She meets the Doctor's eyes. He smiles and the penny finally drops for her. Long pause.)
DOCTOR: (sotto) Hello, sweetie.
RIVER: You are so doing those roots.
DOCTOR: What, the roots of the sunset?
RIVER: Don't you dare.
DOCTOR: I'll have to check with the stars themselves.
RIVER: Oh, shut up. I was just keeping them talking till it kicks off.
CYBORG: What is this conversation? Explain.
RIVER: You keep out of this.
DOCTOR: We need to get to work.
RIVER: Okay, what have you got?
DOCTOR: Four exits. Two concealed, one in the ceiling.
RIVER: There's also one in the floor.
DOCTOR: No, I don't like it.
RIVER: Too close to the engine ducts?
DOCTOR: A bit too tight.
RIVER: Oh, I hope you're not being personal.
FLEMMING: Excuse me, what are you talking about?
RIVER: Hush, Mummy and Daddy are busy.
(A clock chimes the hour.)
RIVER: There we are. Two o'clock. Here we go.
CYBORG: Cease this conversation.
RIVER: Darling, in the event of a sudden meteor strike on the lower starboard decks, where would you say is the safest place to stand?
FLEMMING: Meteor strikes?
DOCTOR: Exactly here, I should think.
RIVER: Do you know what that isn't? A coincidence.
(Rumble.)
DOCTOR: Your escape plan.
RIVER: It's cheaper than a taxi.
SCRATCH: What meteor strike?
COMPUTER: Alert. Meteor storm imminent.
RIVER: That meteor strike.
FLEMMING: How could you know?
RIVER: I'm an archaeologist from the future. I dug you up.
(Boom! Shudder.)
RIVER: See you in four hundred years.
(The floor gives way below the Doctor and River, and they drop into)

[Reception area]

RIVER: I had this book. History's Finest Exploding Restaurants. The best food for free. Skip the coffee.
DOCTOR: What do you think, by the way?
RIVER: Of what?
DOCTOR: My new body.
RIVER: Oh, I'll let you know. I've only seen the face. How have you got a new one, by the way? Aren't there rules?
DOCTOR: A thing happened.
RIVER: I bet it probably did.
COMPUTER: Starboard decks compromised. Please abandon ship.
(Another boom sends the diamond tumbling down, and River catches it in her bodice.)
DOCTOR: The diamond?
RIVER: Good, aren't I?
DOCTOR: I'm not sure good's the word.
RIVER: Better not be.
DOCTOR: We need to get this ship stabilised. Where's the bridge?
RIVER: This way.
COMPUTER: Please abandon ship. Please abandon ship.
(The Cyborg drops down as well.)
DOCTOR: We also need to stop that.
RIVER: Toss for it.
DOCTOR: I'll take the robot, you drive.
RIVER: Okay.
DOCTOR: Oh, don't stop for strangers.
RIVER: Look who's talking.
(River leaves.)
DOCTOR: What's the point? It's over.
CYBORG: I will take your head.
DOCTOR: What for? We're on a crashing spaceship and I don't even know if I can save it. You just shot your own king in your own face. You'd get beheaded if you had one.
CYBORG: I will take yours. King Hydroflax will live again.
(The ship shakes, people scream. The money globe falls. The Doctor jumps and catches it.)
DOCTOR: Do you know what you need? Do you know what any decent headless king needs? Money. This connects every bank to every other bank in this galaxy. Right here in my hand, all the money you can eat.
CYBORG: Demonstrate.
DOCTOR: With pleasure.
(The Cyborg leans forward and the Doctor places the globe on its neck connector. Sparks fly from it.)
DOCTOR: Welcome to all the best firewalls in the galaxy. Nothing is protected like money. Every stock market within a light year is arguing in your head.
CYBORG: I do not understand.
DOCTOR: Ha ha! That's the way it is for most people.
CYBORG: Do not understand. Do not understand.
(The Doctor picks up River's diary which he sees lying on the floor, and comments to the Concierge.)
DOCTOR: He had a bad day on the market.
CYBORG: Do not understand. Do not understand.
DOCTOR: Sorry, I appreciate that wasn't very funny, but I couldn't help saying it.
(He runs up the stairs.)
CYBORG: (distorted) Do not understand. Do not under

[Bridge]

(River is using her sonic trowel on the ship's systems when the Doctor runs in.)
COMPUTER: Surface impact in two minutes.
DOCTOR: Where's everyone else?
RIVER: They ran for it. So should we.
DOCTOR: We need to get the navcom back online. And re-route the thrusters.
RIVER: I'm trying.
COMPUTER: Please abandon ship.
(A console sparks.)
DOCTOR: So, King Hydroflax?
RIVER: Oh, how many times? I married the diamond.
DOCTOR: So you say.
RIVER: Elizabeth the First.
DOCTOR: Ramone.
RIVER: Marilyn Monroe.
DOCTOR: Stephen Fry.
RIVER: Cleopatra!
DOCTOR: Same thing.
(The Doctor sits in the command seat and River looks out of the forward windows.)
RIVER: Hang on a minute. I recognise that planet.
DOCTOR: Well, that's nice. Maybe they'll name the crater after us.
RIVER: That's Darillium!
DOCTOR: Always good to know where we're going. Could you concentrate on your work, please?
RIVER: You know, the Singing Towers.
DOCTOR: Yes, I'll be sure to give them a wave as we zoom past.
RIVER: You always say you're going to take me there for dinner and then you always cancel at the last minute.
DOCTOR: I'd quite like to cancel this time too, if at all possible.
(Boom!)
BOTH: Argh!
(The Doctor uses his nice sonic screwdriver on a console.)
RIVER: What are you doing? That's the internal teleport.
DOCTOR: Yes. I can use the power cell to boost the thrusters.
(He uncoils blue neon cables and holds one out to River.)
RIVER: Really? How?
DOCTOR: Hold this, quickly.
RIVER: Well, I don't see what good this will do.
DOCTOR: Sorry, River. Crashing spaceships, that's my job.
RIVER: You
(River is teleported away.)

[Tardis]

RIVER: No, you don't!
(She sets the Tardis flying.)

[Bridge]

DOCTOR: More power. You can do it, you can do it.
(The Tardis materialises around him.)
DOCTOR: No, River, no, no, no, no!
(River comes out of the Tardis, followed by the Doctor.)
DOCTOR: Get back in the Tardis! This is my job!
RIVER: This is my job!
DOCTOR: I've been doing it longer.
RIVER: I do it better.
DOCTOR: River, not one person on this ship, not one living thing, is worth you.
RIVER: Or you.
COMPUTER: Surface impact in ten, nine, eight
(The forward window glass is breaking as the ground rushes to meet them.)
RIVER: Teensy bit close.
DOCTOR: Yeah, sort of.
RIVER: Darling, shall we pop back indoors?
DOCTOR: Yeah, good idea.
COMPUTER: Four, three, two, one.

[Tardis]

(The impact sends them flying across the console room. The Doctor recovers first. He checks River's pulse.)
DOCTOR: Indestructible as ever.
(The diamond is on the floor. He picks it up.)
DOCTOR: Married the diamond.
(He looks out of the Tardis door at the burning wreckage, then closes it again. He jumps the Tardis forward in time a little, then goes outside again.)

[Darillium]

(The wreckage is still smoking gently. A man in a hard hat runs over.)
ALPHONSE: Hello? Sir. The ship, it came down. Did you see it?
DOCTOR: Yes, I did.
ALPHONSE: I've been searching for survivors.
DOCTOR: I doubt if you'd find any. And I don't think any of them would be worth it, if that's a comfort. Brave of you to try, though. Well done.
ALPHONSE: Thank you, sir.
(Two tall pillars of stone stand proud of the flat landscape.)
DOCTOR: Those are the Singing Towers, aren't they?
ALPHONSE: Yes, sir, but it's just the wind.
DOCTOR: The Singing Towers of Darillium. Here we are at last.
ALPHONSE: Sir?
DOCTOR: You know what? They should build a restaurant right here, with a view of those towers. You could make a lot of money that way. You should do that.
ALPHONSE: You'd need a lot of money to begin with, sir.
(The Doctor shows Alphonse the diamond.)
DOCTOR: The Halassi Androvar. I think you'll find that the reward is pretty substantial.
(Then drops it into his gloved hand.)
ALPHONSE: Why would you give me this, sir?
DOCTOR: (sotto) Restaurant!
(The Doctor goes back into the Tardis. River is still unconscious. He sets the Tardis flying forward in time again, and goes out into -)

[Restaurant]

DOCTOR: Excuse me, um, I'd like a table on the balcony with a view of the towers.
RECEPTIONIST: I'm sorry, sir. The first available slot I have is Christmas Day in four years' time.
DOCTOR: Not a problem.
(River wakes up in the Tardis and goes outside. The receptionist's hairstyle is different, so we can presume it is four years later. A string orchestra is playing The First Noel.)
RECEPTIONIST: Professor Song. The Doctor is waiting for you on the balcony.
RIVER: Oh. Excellent.
RECEPTIONIST: This way, ma'am.
RIVER: Do we have a good table?
RECEPTIONIST: The finest in all the galaxy, ma'am.
RIVER: Ah. Er, one moment.
(River uses her transformational spray again.)

[Balcony]

(She walks around the corner in her new red velvet sequinned dress to see a big red metal being with a tiny bearded human head between its shoulders.)
RIVER: Ramone?
RAMONE: Professor Song. The Doctor will be with you in a moment.
RIVER: What are you doing here?
RAMONE: They pulled us from the wreckage, ma'am. Fixed us up. I've been working here ever since. Don't worry. The nasty part's all gone. Got deleted in the merger.
RIVER: What about Nardole?
NARDOLE [OC]: Oh, Merry Christmas, ma'am. Yeah, good to see you again.
RIVER: Merry Christmas, Nardole!
NARDOLE [OC]: Sorry I'm off duty. I'm just having some me time.
RIVER: I imagine that must be quite a challenge.
NARDOLE: Yes, ma'am. (laughs)
RIVER: So, Ramone, you have a metal body now.
DOCTOR: Down, girl.
(The Doctor has swapped his burgundy velvet jacket for a black suit and tie, and is carrying a gift.)
RIVER: Now that, my dear, is a suit.
DOCTOR: Happy Christmas.
RIVER: Really? I don't think you've ever given me a present before.
(She opens the box to reveal the sonic screwdriver she had in the Library.)
RIVER: Oh, it's a sonic screwdriver! How lovely!
DOCTOR: When I saw the sonic trowel, I thought it was just embarrassing, but, look.
(He demonstrates the screwdriver.)
RIVER: Oh, thank you.
(And kisses the Doctor on both cheeks.)
DOCTOR: You look, er, amazing.
RIVER: Doctor, you have no idea whether I look amazing or not.
DOCTOR: Well, you've moved your hair about, haven't you?
RIVER: Well done. It's very sweet of you to try.
DOCTOR: So what do you think? The Singing Towers.
(River gazes at the pillars with the sun setting behind them.)
RIVER: Oh. The music. Listen to it. Are you crying?
DOCTOR: No. Just the wind.
RIVER: Nothing's ever just the wind.
DOCTOR: No? It blows through the cave system and harmonises with the crystal layer.
RIVER: Why are you sad?
DOCTOR: Why are you sad?
RIVER: I told you, my diary's nearly full. I worry.
DOCTOR: Please don't.
RIVER: There are stories about us, you know.
DOCTOR: Oh, I dread to think.
RIVER: I look them up sometimes.
DOCTOR: You really shouldn't do that.
RIVER: Some of them suggest that the very last night we spend together is at the Singing Towers of Darillium. That wouldn't be true, would it?
DOCTOR: Spoilers.
RIVER: Oh. Well, that would explain why you kept cancelling coming here. Do you remember that time
DOCTOR: River, stop.
RIVER: When there were two of you
DOCTOR: Don't.
RIVER: Because I want you to know that if this is the last night, I expect you to find a way round it.
DOCTOR: Not everything can be avoided. Not forever.
RIVER: But you're you. There's always a loophole. You wait until the last minute and then you spring it on me.
DOCTOR: Every night is the last night for something. Every Christmas is the last Christmas
But you will. You'll wait until I've given up hope. All will be lost, and you'll do that smug little smile and then you'll save the day. You always do.
DOCTOR: No, I don't. Not always. Times end, River, because they have to. Because there's no such thing as happy ever after. It's just a lie we tell ourselves because the truth is so hard.
RIVER: No, Doctor, you're wrong. Happy ever after doesn't mean forever. It just means time. A little time. But that's not the sort of thing you could ever understand, is it?
DOCTOR: Mmm. What do you think of the towers?
RIVER: I love them.
DOCTOR: Then why are you ignoring them?
RIVER: They're ignoring me. But then you can't expect a monolith to love you back.
DOCTOR: No, you can't. They've been there for millions of years, through storms and floods and wars and time. Nobody really understands where the music comes from. It's probably something to do with the precise positions, the distance between both towers. Even the locals aren't sure. All anyone will ever tell you is that when the wind stands fair and the night is perfect, when you least expect it but always when you need it the most there is a song.
RIVER: So, assuming tonight is all we have left.
DOCTOR: I didn't say that.
RIVER: How long is a night on Darillium?
DOCTOR: Twenty four years.
RIVER: (nearly laughing and crying at the same time) I hate you.
DOCTOR: No, you don't.
(They gaze into each others eyes.)

And they both lived happily ever after ...
And they both lived happily
happily
